# Use of Aircraft Lights

a. Aircraft position lights are required to be lighted
on aircraft operated on the surface and in flight from
sunset to sunrise. In addition, aircraft equipped with
an anti-collision light system are required to operate
that light system during all types of operations (day
and night). However, during any adverse meteorological conditions, the pilot-in-command may
determine that the anti-collision lights should be
turned off when their light output would constitute a
hazard to safety (14 CFR Section 91.209).
Supplementary strobe lights should be turned off on
the ground when they adversely affect ground
personnel or other pilots, and in flight when there are
adverse reflection from clouds.
b. An aircraft anti-collision light system can use
one or more rotating beacons and/or strobe lights, be
colored either red or white, and have different (higher
than minimum) intensities when compared to other
aircraft. Many aircraft have both a rotating beacon
and a strobe light system.
c. The FAA has a voluntary pilot safety program,
Operation Lights On, to enhance the see-and-avoid
concept. Pilots are encouraged to turn on their landing
lights during takeoff; i.e., either after takeoff
clearance has been received or when beginning
takeoff roll. Pilots are further encouraged to turn on
their landing lights when operating below
10,000 feet, day or night, especially when operating
within 10 miles of any airport, or in conditions of
reduced visibility and in areas where flocks of birds
may be expected, i.e., coastal areas, lake areas,
around refuse dumps, etc. Although turning on
aircraft lights does enhance the see-and-avoid
concept, pilots should not become complacent about
keeping a sharp lookout for other aircraft. Not all
aircraft are equipped with lights and some pilots may
not have their lights turned on. Aircraft manufactur-

4-3-26


er’s recommendations for operation of landing lights
and electrical systems should be observed.
d. Prop and jet blast forces generated by large
aircraft have overturned or damaged several smaller
aircraft taxiing behind them. To avoid similar results,
and in the interest of preventing upsets and injuries to
ground personnel from such forces, the FAA
recommends that air carriers and commercial
operators turn on their rotating beacons anytime their
aircraft engines are in operation. General aviation
pilots using rotating beacon equipped aircraft are also
encouraged to participate in this program which is
designed to alert others to the potential hazard. Since
this is a voluntary program, exercise caution and do
not rely solely on the rotating beacon as an indication
that aircraft engines are in operation.
e. Prior to commencing taxi, it is recommended to
turn on navigation, position, anti-collision, and logo
lights (if equipped). To signal intent to other pilots,
consider turning on the taxi light when the aircraft is
moving or intending to move on the ground, and
turning it off when stopped or yielding to other
ground traffic. Strobe lights should not be illuminated
during taxi if they will adversely affect the vision of
other pilots or ground personnel.
f. At the discretion of the pilot-in-command, all
exterior lights should be illuminated when taxiing on
or across any runway. This increases the conspicuousness of the aircraft to controllers and other pilots
approaching to land, taxiing, or crossing the runway.
Pilots should comply with any equipment operating
limitations and consider the effects of landing and
strobe lights on other aircraft in their vicinity.
g. When entering the departure runway for takeoff
or to “line up and wait,” all lights, except for landing
lights, should be illuminated to make the aircraft
conspicuous to ATC and other aircraft on approach.
Landing lights should be turned on when takeoff
clearance is received or when commencing takeoff
roll at an airport without an operating control tower.
