                                                                                                 SAFO
                                                                                                 Safety Alert for Operators

                                                                                                 SAFO 23001
    U.S. Department                                                                              DATE: 01/03/23
    of Transportation
    Federal Aviation                                                                             Flight Standards Service
    Administration                                                                               Washington, DC

http://www.faa.gov/other_visit/aviation_industry/airline_operators/airline_safety/safo
A SAFO contains important safety information and may include recommended action. Besides the specific action
recommended in a SAFO, an alternative action may be as effective in addressing the safety issue named in the SAFO. The
contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This
document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.

Subject: Potential Damage to Nose Landing Gear (NLG) by Improper Towing Procedures of the
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Regional Jet (MHIRJ) (formerly Bombardier) CL-600-2B19, CL-600-2C10
and CL-600-2D24 Airplanes.

Purpose: This SAFO serves to alert air carriers and commercial operators of the potential for damage to
the NLG when using certain towing procedures. In particular, this SAFO alerts air carriers and
commercial operators that they should avoid certain towing procedures in which a towing strap is placed
around the NLG housing, as per MHIRJ’s 1 Instructions for Continued Airworthiness as written in the
Aircraft Maintenance Manual (AMM).

Background: The AMM advises only securing the towing strap of a towbar-less style aircraft tractor,
commonly referred to as a “Lektro” tractor, to the NLG chrome piston, commonly referred to as an oleo
piston. When placed around the NLG housing, also referred to as the NLG barrel, barrel housing, or outer
cylinder, the towing strap can cause damage over time by abrading through the paint, conversion coatings
(alodine or cadmium plating), and the surface stress relieving treatments (shot-peening).

Discussion: Some General Operations Manuals (GOMs) instruct operators to place the towing strap in
specific places depending on the facts of a situation. If a tow collar is installed on the NLG, the GOMs
instruct operators to place the towing strap on the tow collar. If there is no tow collar installed on the
NLG, the GOMs instruct operators to place the tow strap on the NLG chrome piston. Placing the towing
strap on the NLG housing is meant to be a last resort, only to occur if there is no tow collar installed and
none of the NLG chrome piston is visible.

While limited situations might exist in which none of the NLG chrome piston is visible and placing the
towing strap around the NLG housing is the only possible way to secure the strap, such placement should
be used only as a last resort. Cumulative wear damage to the NLG housing occurs when the towing strap
is placed around the NLG housing. In addition to the wear damage on the NLG housing, placing the
towing strap on the NLG housing causes frequent impact damage as a result of the strap sliding up and
bending the proximity switches. This damages the wiring harnesses and various linkages. The harnesses
1
 On June 1, 2020, MHIRJ acquired the CRJ maintenance, support, refurbishment, marketing, sales, and Type Certificates from
Bombardier.


Distributed by: Flight Standards

and linkages are also damaged when the operator misroutes the towing strap while placing it around the
housing. This type of damage typically results in a “gear disagree” message, leading to the NLG failing to
retract after take-off. Therefore, operators should generally avoid placing the towing strap around the
NLG housing.

Recommended Action: If using a procedure in a GOM that describes placing the towing strap around the
NLG housing, air carriers and commercial operators should remain mindful that instructions in GOMs
only indicate following this procedure when no tow collar is present and when none of the NLG chrome
piston is visible.

Contact: Questions or comments regarding this SAFO should be directed to the Aircraft Evaluation
Division at 9-avs-afs-100@faa.gov.


Distributed by: Flight Standards