CHAPTER 7. WIND

7.1     Introduction. Wind is the air in motion relative to the surface of the Earth. Although
        we cannot actually see the air moving, we can measure its motion by the force that
        it applies on objects. For example, leaves rustling or trees swaying on a windy day
        indicate that the wind is blowing. Winds are a major factor to both weather and aircraft.
        Winds cause the formation, dissipation, and redistribution of weather. Winds also affect
        aircraft during all phases of flight. This chapter discusses how winds are named and the
        origin of wind.

7.2     Naming of the Wind. Wind is named according to the direction from which
        it is blowing. For example, a west wind indicates the wind is blowing from the west
        to the east. In aviation, 36 points of the compass are normally used to represent the
        direction from which the wind is blowing. For example, north winds come from 360°,
        east from 90°, south from 180°, and west from 270°.

7.3     Forces That Affect the Wind. Three primary forces affect the flow of wind: Pressure
        Gradient Force (PGF), Coriolis force, and friction.

7.3.1   Pressure Gradient Force (PGF). Wind is driven by pressure differences which create
        a force called the Pressure Gradient Force (PGF). Whenever a pressure difference
        develops over an area, the PGF makes the wind blow in an attempt to equalize pressure
        differences. This force is identified by height contour gradients on constant pressure
        charts and by isobar gradients on surface charts.

        PGF is directed from higher height/pressure to lower height/pressure and is perpendicular
        to contours/isobars. Whenever a pressure difference develops over an area, the PGF
        begins moving the air directly across the contours/isobars.

                       Figure 7-1. Direction of Pressure Gradient Force


                  PGF is directed across contours/isobars towards lower height/pressure.


                                                   7-1

8/23/16                                                                                             AC 00-6B


        Wind speed is directly proportional to the PGF, which itself is directly proportional to the
        contour/isobar gradient. Closely spaced contours/isobars indicate strong winds, while
        widely spaced contours/isobars mean lighter wind. From a pressure analysis, you can get
        a general idea of wind speed from contour/isobar spacing.

                         Figure 7-2. Magnitude of Pressure Gradient Force


On the left panel, the contours/isobars are widely spaced apart, PGF is weak, and the wind speed is weak. On the
right panel, the contours/isobars are more closely spaced, the PGF is stronger, and the wind speed is stronger.

        The wind would flow from high to low pressure if the PGF was the only force acting
        on it. However, because of the Earth’s rotation, there is a second force called the
        Coriolis force that affects the direction of wind flow.

7.3.2   Coriolis Force. A moving mass travels in a straight line until acted on by some outside
        force. However, if one views the moving mass from a rotating platform, the path of the
        moving mass relative to his platform appears to be deflected or curved. To illustrate,
        consider a turntable. If one used a pencil and a ruler to draw a straight line from the
        center to the outer edge of the turntable, the pencil will have traveled in a straight line.
        However, stopping the turntable, it is evident that the line spirals outward from the center
        (see Figure 7-3). To a viewer on the turntable, some apparent force deflected the pencil
        to the right.

                               Figure 7-3. Illustration of Coriolis Force


                                                      7-2

8/23/16                                                                                                 AC 00-6B


         A similar apparent force deflects moving particles on the Earth. Because the Earth
         is spherical, the deflective force is much more complex than the simple turntable
         example. Although the force is termed apparent to us on Earth, it is very real.
         The principle was first explained by the Frenchman Gaspard-Gustave de Coriolis, and
         now carries his name—the Coriolis force.

         Coriolis force affects all moving objects. The force deflects air to the right in the
         Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere.

         Coriolis force is at a right angle to wind direction and directly proportional to wind
         speed; that is, as wind speed increases, Coriolis force increases. At a given latitude,
         double the wind speed and you double the Coriolis force. Why at a given latitude?

         Coriolis force varies with latitude from zero at the Equator to a maximum at the poles.
         It influences wind direction everywhere except immediately at the Equator, but the
         effects are more pronounced in middle and high latitudes.

                       Figure 7-4. Coriolis Force Variations Across the Earth


Coriolis force deflects moving objects to the right of their path in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left of their
path in the Southern Hemisphere. Coriolis deflection is maximized at the poles and zero at the Equator.


                                                        7-3

8/23/16                                                                                                AC 00-6B


               Figure 7-5. Coriolis Force Magnitude Variations with Wind Speed


Coriolis force magnitude is directly proportional to wind speed. Wind speed is twice as strong in the right panel;
thus, the Coriolis force is doubled.

7.3.3   Friction Force. Friction between the wind and the terrain surface slows the wind.
        The rougher the terrain, the greater the frictional effect. Also, the stronger the wind
        speed, the greater the friction. One may not think of friction as a force, but it is a very real
        and effective force always acting opposite to wind direction.

           Figure 7-6. Friction Force Magnitude Variations with Terrain Roughness


Friction force magnitude is directly proportional to terrain roughness. Even though the wind speed is the same
in both panels, the terrain is rougher in the right panel; thus, the friction force is stronger.

               Figure 7-7. Friction Force Magnitude Variations with Wind Speed


Friction force magnitude is directly proportional to wind speed. Wind speed is twice as strong in the right panel;
thus, the friction force is doubled.

        The frictional drag of the ground normally decreases with height and becomes
        insignificant above the lowest few thousand feet. However, this may vary somewhat
        since both strong winds and rough terrain extend the friction layer to higher altitudes.


                                                        7-4

8/23/16                                                                                 AC 00-6B


7.4   Upper Air Wind. In the atmosphere above the friction layer (lowest few thousand feet),
      only PGF and Coriolis force affect the horizontal motion of air. Remember that the PGF
      drives the wind and is oriented perpendicular to height contours. When a PGF is first
      established, wind begins to blow from higher to lower heights directly across the
      contours. However, the instant air begins moving, Coriolis force deflects it to the right.
      Soon the wind is deflected a full 90° and is parallel to the contours. At this time, Coriolis
      force exactly balances PGF, as shown in Figure 7-8. With the forces in balance, wind will
      remain parallel to contours. This is called the geostrophic wind.

                                Figure 7-8. Geostrophic Wind


                              Figure 7-9. Upper Air Wind Flow


                                              7-5

8/23/16                                                                               AC 00-6B


7.5   Surface Wind. At the surface of the Earth, all three forces come into play. As frictional
      force slows the wind speed, Coriolis force decreases. However, friction does not affect
      PGF. PGF and Coriolis force are no longer in balance. The stronger PGF turns the wind
      at an angle across the isobars toward lower pressure until the three forces balance,
      as shown in Figure 7-10.

                             Figure 7-10. Surface Wind Forces


      The angle of surface wind to isobars is about 10° over water, increasing to as high as 45°
      over rugged terrain. The end result is, in the Northern Hemisphere, the surface wind
      spirals clockwise and outward from high pressure, and counterclockwise and inward into
      low pressure (see Figure 7-11). In mountainous regions, one often has difficulty relating
      surface wind to pressure gradient because of immense friction, and also because of local
      terrain effects on pressure.

                              Figure 7-11. Surface Wind Flow


                                              7-6

8/23/16                                                                                 AC 00-6B