16.1.1 Fog. Fog is a visible aggregate of minute water droplets that are based at the Earth’s
       surface and reduces horizontal visibility to less than 5/8 statute mile (1 kilometer); unlike
       drizzle, it does not fall to the ground. Fog differs from cloud only in that its base must
       be at the Earth’s surface, while clouds are above the surface.

       Cloud droplets can remain liquid even when the air temperature is below freezing.
       Fog composed of water droplets and occurring with temperatures at or below freezing
       is termed freezing fog. When fog is composed of ice crystals, it is termed ice fog. If fog
       is so shallow that it is not an obstruction to vision at a height of 6 feet (2 meters) above
       the surface, it is called simply shallow (ground) fog.

       Fog forms when the temperature and dewpoint of the air become identical (or nearly so).
       This may occur through cooling of the air to a little beyond its dewpoint (producing
       radiation fog, advection fog, or upslope fog), or by adding moisture and thereby elevating
       the dewpoint (producing frontal fog or steam fog). Fog seldom forms when the
       temperature-dewpoint spread is greater than 2 °C (4 °F).

       16.1.1.1    Fog Types. Fog types are named according to their formation mechanism.

       16.1.1.1.1 Radiation Fog. Radiation fog (see Figure 16-1) is a common type of fog,
                  produced over a land area when radiational cooling reduces the air
                  temperature to or below its dewpoint. Thus, radiation fog is generally
                  a nighttime occurrence and often does not dissipate until after sunrise.

                                   Figure 16-1. Radiation Fog


                                                16-1

8/23/16                                                                                 AC 00-6B


                 Radiation fog is relatively shallow fog. It may be dense enough to hide the
                 entire sky or may conceal only part of the sky. Ground fog is a form
                 of radiation fog that is confined to near ground level.

                 Factors favoring the formation of radiation fog are: 1) a shallow surface layer
                 of relatively moist air beneath a dry layer, 2) clear skies, and 3) light surface
                 winds. Terrestrial radiation cools the ground; in turn, the ground cools the air
                 in contact with it. When the air is cooled to its dewpoint, fog forms. When
                 rain soaks the ground, followed by clearing skies, radiation fog is not
                 uncommon the following morning.

                 Radiation fog is restricted to land because water surfaces cool little from
                 nighttime radiation. It is shallow when wind is calm. Winds up to about
                 5 knots mix the air slightly and tend to deepen the fog by spreading the
                 cooling through a deeper layer. Stronger winds disperse the fog or mix the air
                 through a still deeper layer with stratus clouds forming at the top of the
                 mixing layer.

                 Ground fog usually burns off rather rapidly after sunrise. Other radiation fog
                 generally clears before noon unless clouds move in over the fog. It can
                 be difficult at times to differentiate between this and other types of fog,
                 especially since nighttime cooling intensifies all fogs.

      16.1.1.1.2 Advection Fog. Advection fog (see Figure 16-2) forms when moist air moves
                 over a colder surface (see Figure 16-3), and the subsequent cooling of that air
                 to below its dewpoint. It is most common along coastal areas, but often moves
                 deep in continental areas. At sea, it is called sea fog. Advection fog deepens
                 as wind speed increases up to about 15 knots. Wind much stronger than
                 15 knots lifts the fog into a layer of low stratus or stratocumulus clouds.

                                 Figure 16-2. Advection Fog


                                             16-2

8/23/16                                                                                AC 00-6B


                           Figure 16-3. Advection Fog Formation


                 The west coast of the United States is quite vulnerable to advection fog. This
                 fog frequently forms offshore as a result of cold water and then is carried
                 inland by the wind. It can remain over the water for weeks, advancing over the
                 land during night and retreating back over the water the next morning.

                 During the winter, advection fog over the central and eastern United States
                 results when moist air from the Gulf of Mexico spreads northward over cold
                 ground. The fog may extend as far north as the Great Lakes. Water areas
                 in northern latitudes have frequent dense sea fog in summer as a result
                 of warm, moist, tropical air flowing northward over colder Arctic waters.

                 A pilot will notice little difference between flying over advection fog and over
                 radiation fog. Also, advection fog is usually more extensive and much more
                 persistent than radiation fog. Advection fog can move in rapidly regardless
                 of the time of day or night.

      16.1.1.1.3 Upslope Fog. Upslope fog forms as a result of moist, stable air being
                 adiabatically cooled to or below its dewpoint as it moves up sloping terrain.
                 Winds speeds of 5 to 15 knots are most favorable since stronger winds tend
                 to lift the fog into a layer of low stratus clouds. Unlike radiation fog, it can
                 form under cloudy skies. Upslope fog is common along the eastern slopes
                 of the Rockies, and somewhat less frequent east of the Appalachians. Upslope
                 fog is often quite dense and extends to high altitudes.

      16.1.1.1.4 Frontal Fog. When warm, moist air is lifted over a front, clouds and
                 precipitation may form. If the cold air below is near its dewpoint, evaporation
                 (or sublimation) from the precipitation may saturate the cold air and form fog


                                             16-3

8/23/16                                                                               AC 00-6B


                 (see Figure 16-4). A fog formed in this manner is called frontal
                 (or precipitation-induced) fog. The result is a more or less continuous zone
                 of condensed water droplets reaching from the ground up through the clouds.
                 Frontal fog can become quite dense and continue for an extended period
                 of time. This fog may extend over large areas, completely suspending air
                 operations. It is most commonly associated with warm fronts, but can occur
                 with other fronts as well.

                            Figure 16-4. Frontal Fog Formation


      16.1.1.1.5 Steam Fog. When very cold air moves across relatively warm water, enough
                 moisture may evaporate from the water surface to produce saturation. As the
                 rising water vapor meets the cold air, it immediately recondenses and rises
                 with the air that is being warmed from below. Because the air is destabilized,
                 fog appears as rising filaments or streamers that resemble steam. This
                 phenomenon is called steam fog. It is commonly observed over lakes and
                 streams on cold autumn mornings, and over the ocean during the winter when
                 cold air masses move off the continents and ice shelves. Steam fog is often
                 very shallow, for as the steam rises, it reevaporates in the unsaturated air
                 above. However, it can be dense and extend over large areas.

                 Steam fog is associated with a shallow layer of unstable air. Thus, pilots can
                 expect convective turbulence flying through it. On occasion, columns
                 of condensed vapor rise from the fog layer, forming whirling steam devils,
                 which appear similar to the dust devils on land.


                                             16-4

8/23/16                                                                                   AC 00-6B