---
handbook: phak
edition: FAA-H-8083-25C
chapter_number: 12
section_title: Effect of Obstructions on Wind
faa_pages: 12-8
section_number: 8
subsection_number: 3
source_url: https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/handbooks_manuals/aviation/faa-h-8083-25c.pdf
---

# Effect of Obstructions on Wind

Effect of Obstructions on Wind
Another atmospheric hazard exists that can create problems
for pilots. Obstructions on the ground affect the flow of
wind and can be an unseen danger. Ground topography and
large buildings can break up the flow of the wind and create
wind gusts that change rapidly in direction and speed. These
obstructions range from man-made structures, like hangars,
to large natural obstructions, such as mountains, bluffs, or
canyons. It is especially important to be vigilant when flying
in or out of airports that have large buildings or natural
obstructions located near the runway. [Figure 12-15]
The intensity of the turbulence associated with ground
obstructions depends on the size of the obstacle and the
primary velocity of the wind. This can affect the takeoff and
landing performance of any aircraft and can present a very
serious hazard. During the landing phase of flight, an aircraft

Return flow
Land breeze
Return flow
Sea breeze
Warm
Cool
Cool
Warm
Figure 12-13. Sea breeze and land breeze wind circulation patterns.
W
ar
m

a
ir
ri
si
ng
C
o
ol

a
ir
si
nk
in
g
Intended Flight path
Figure 12-14. Currents generated by varying surface conditions.

I N
 D

W
Figure 12-15. Turbulence caused by manmade obstructions.
WIND
Figure 12-16. Turbulence in mountainous regions.
a similar manner. As the air flows down the leeward side of
the mountain, the air follows the contour of the terrain and
is increasingly turbulent. This tends to push an aircraft into
the side of a mountain. The stronger the wind, the greater the
downward pressure and turbulence become.
Due to the effect terrain has on the wind in valleys or canyons,
downdrafts can be severe. Before conducting a flight in or
may “drop in” due to the turbulent air and be too low to clear
obstacles during the approach.
This same condition is even more noticeable when flying in
mountainous regions. [Figure 12-16] While the wind flows
smoothly up the windward side of the mountain and the
upward currents help to carry an aircraft over the peak of
the mountain, the wind on the leeward side does not act in

Intended Path
I
n
c
r
e
a
si
ng
 ta
ilw
ind

In
cr
e
a
si
n
g

h
e
a
d
w
i
n
d
Strong downdraft
Outflow
Outflow
Figure 12-17. Effects of a microburst wind.
near mountainous terrain, it is helpful for a pilot unfamiliar
with a mountainous area to get a checkout with a mountain
qualified flight instructor.
