---
handbook: phak
edition: FAA-H-8083-25C
chapter_number: 12
section_title: Fog
faa_pages: 12-15
section_number: 9
subsection_number: 7
source_url: https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/handbooks_manuals/aviation/faa-h-8083-25c.pdf
---

# Fog

Fog
Fog is a cloud that is on the surface. It typically occurs when
the temperature of air near the ground is cooled to the air’s
dew point. At this point, water vapor in the air condenses and
becomes visible in the form of fog. Fog is classified according
to the manner in which it forms and is dependent upon the
current temperature and the amount of water vapor in the air.
On clear nights, with relatively little to no wind present,
radiation fog may develop. [Figure 12-21] Usually, it forms
in low-lying areas like mountain valleys. This type of fog
occurs when the ground cools rapidly due to terrestrial
radiation, and the surrounding air temperature reaches its
dew point. As the sun rises and the temperature increases,
radiation fog lifts and eventually burns off. Any increase in
wind also speeds the dissipation of radiation fog. If radiation
fog is less than 20 feet thick, it is known as ground fog.
When a layer of warm, moist air moves over a cold surface,
advection fog is likely to occur. Unlike radiation fog, wind
is required to form advection fog. Winds of up to 15 knots
allow the fog to form and intensify; above a speed of 15 knots,
the fog usually lifts and forms low stratus clouds. Advection
fog is common in coastal areas where sea breezes can blow
the air over cooler landmasses.
Upslope fog occurs when moist, stable air is forced up sloping
land features like a mountain range. This type of fog also
requires wind for formation and continued existence. Upslope
and advection fog, unlike radiation fog, may not burn off with
the morning sun but instead can persist for days. They can
also extend to greater heights than radiation fog.
Steam fog, or sea smoke, forms when cold, dry air moves over
warm water. As the water evaporates, it rises and resembles
smoke. This type of fog is common over bodies of water
during the coldest times of the year. Low-level turbulence
and icing are commonly associated with steam fog.
Ice fog occurs in cold weather when the temperature is
much below freezing and water vapor forms directly into ice
crystals. Conditions favorable for its formation are the same
as for radiation fog except for cold temperature, usually –25
°F or colder. It occurs mostly in the arctic regions but is not
unknown in middle latitudes during the cold season.
