9.12.3 Turbulence Generated by Aircraft.

          9.12.3.1   Wake Turbulence. A phenomenon that occurs when an aircraft develops lift
                     and forms a pair of counter-rotating vortices. All aircraft generate wake
                     turbulence. Therefore, pilots should be prepared to encounter turbulence while
                     operating in a traffic pattern and especially when in the trail of other aircraft.
                     Wake turbulence can damage aircraft components and equipment. In flight,
                     and especially when in a traffic pattern, avoid the area below and behind the
                     aircraft generating turbulence, especially at a low altitude where even a
                     momentary wake encounter could be hazardous.

                     Note: All operators should be aware of the potential of wake
                     turbulence when operating at any airport. Since the turbulence from a
                     “dirty,” flaps and landing gear extended, aircraft configuration hastens
                     wake decay, the greatest vortex strength occurs when the generating
                     aircraft is “HEAVY,” “CLEAN,” and “SLOW.” Be alert to the wake
                     turbulence you could be generating to smaller aircraft.

          9.12.3.2   Rotor Wash. A phenomenon resulting from the vertical down wash of air
                     generated by the main rotor(s) of a helicopter.

          9.12.3.3   Propeller (Prop) Wash (Prop Blast). A disturbed mass of air generated by
                     the motion of a propeller.

                                                   10

 6/6/23                                                                                  AC 90-66C


          9.12.3.4   Jet Blast. Force of the “air” from the rear section of the jet engine. Almost
                     half of the jet blast incidents reported to the Aviation Safety Reporting System
                     (ASRS) occurred on taxiways, in run-up areas, and adjacent to or on runways,
                     all relatively uncongested airport areas. The other half occurred on ramps,
                     where many more such incidents might be expected because of close aircraft
                     parking and tight maneuvering conditions. You should give yourself ample
                     distance behind a jet. For example, in one case, a small aircraft performing a
                     run-up 150 feet behind and to the side of an airliner holding short of the
                     runway experienced a wing and prop strike when the larger aircraft powered
                     up. Refer to the FAA ASRS Ground Jet Blast Hazard.