9.12 Other Considerations at Non-Towered Airports.

9.12.1 Flight Inspection Aircraft. Pilots should be aware that flight inspection aircraft may be
       operating near the airport, in a nonstandard traffic pattern or opposite direction to conduct
       inspection of navigational aids. In addition, flight inspection aircraft frequently conduct
       low approaches over the runway. Flight inspection aircraft use the call sign “flight check”
       and will self-announce their position and intentions on the designated frequency. Pilots
       should be vigilant when they hear “flight check” on the frequency.

9.12.2 No-Radio Aircraft. Pilots should be aware that procedures at airports without operating
       control towers generally do not require the use of two-way radios; therefore, pilots should
       be especially vigilant for other aircraft while operating in the traffic pattern. Pilots of
       inbound aircraft that are not capable of radio communications should determine the
       runway in use prior to entering the traffic pattern by observing the landing direction
       indicator, the wind indicator, landing and departing traffic, previously referring to
       relevant airport publications, or by other means.

9.12.3 Turbulence Generated by Aircraft.

          9.12.3.1   Wake Turbulence. A phenomenon that occurs when an aircraft develops lift
                     and forms a pair of counter-rotating vortices. All aircraft generate wake
                     turbulence. Therefore, pilots should be prepared to encounter turbulence while
                     operating in a traffic pattern and especially when in the trail of other aircraft.
                     Wake turbulence can damage aircraft components and equipment. In flight,
                     and especially when in a traffic pattern, avoid the area below and behind the
                     aircraft generating turbulence, especially at a low altitude where even a
                     momentary wake encounter could be hazardous.

                     Note: All operators should be aware of the potential of wake
                     turbulence when operating at any airport. Since the turbulence from a
                     “dirty,” flaps and landing gear extended, aircraft configuration hastens
                     wake decay, the greatest vortex strength occurs when the generating
                     aircraft is “HEAVY,” “CLEAN,” and “SLOW.” Be alert to the wake
                     turbulence you could be generating to smaller aircraft.

          9.12.3.2   Rotor Wash. A phenomenon resulting from the vertical down wash of air
                     generated by the main rotor(s) of a helicopter.

          9.12.3.3   Propeller (Prop) Wash (Prop Blast). A disturbed mass of air generated by
                     the motion of a propeller.

                                                   10

 6/6/23                                                                                  AC 90-66C


          9.12.3.4   Jet Blast. Force of the “air” from the rear section of the jet engine. Almost
                     half of the jet blast incidents reported to the Aviation Safety Reporting System
                     (ASRS) occurred on taxiways, in run-up areas, and adjacent to or on runways,
                     all relatively uncongested airport areas. The other half occurred on ramps,
                     where many more such incidents might be expected because of close aircraft
                     parking and tight maneuvering conditions. You should give yourself ample
                     distance behind a jet. For example, in one case, a small aircraft performing a
                     run-up 150 feet behind and to the side of an airliner holding short of the
                     runway experienced a wing and prop strike when the larger aircraft powered
                     up. Refer to the FAA ASRS Ground Jet Blast Hazard.

9.12.4 Right-of-Way. Throughout the traffic pattern, right-of-way rules apply as stated in
       § 91.113: “When weather conditions permit, regardless of whether an operation is
       conducted under instrument flight rules or visual flight rules, vigilance shall be
       maintained by each person operating an aircraft so as to see and avoid other aircraft.
       When a rule of this section gives another aircraft the right-of-way, the pilot shall give
       way to that aircraft and may not pass over, under, or ahead of it unless well clear.”

9.12.5 Other Approaches to Land and Airports with Multiple Runways. Pilots should be aware
       of the other types of approaches to land that may be used at an airport when a pilot
       indicates they are doing so, which may or may not be initiated from the traffic pattern.
       The more common types of these include a short approach, low approach, or an overhead
       approach. Also, at airports with multiple runways, to reduce the risk of a collision on
       takeoff or arrival, you should be vigilant and scan for operations on other runways that
       may conflict with your operation. Some airports do not provide a clear line of sight to
       other runways, diminishing a pilot’s situational awareness during departures. You should
       be alert and aware of tower/aircraft communications, and identify what runway or
       runways are being used for takeoff and landing. If operating at a towered airport with
       crossing runways, and you are in doubt if the other aircraft’s takeoff runway will conflict
       with your takeoff, you should contact the tower to confirm if your takeoff runway will
       not conflict with another aircraft taking off. If at a non-towered airport, you should use
       the CTAF and ask the other departing aircraft which runway they are departing from or
       landing on to avoid the risk of a takeoff or landing collision with another aircraft.

          9.12.5.1   A Short Approach. A short approach is executed when the pilot makes an
                     abbreviated downwind, base, and final legs turning inside of the
                     standard 90-degree base turn. This can be requested at a towered airport for
                     aircraft spacing, but is more commonly used at a non-towered airport or a
                     part-time-towered airport when the control tower is not operating, when
                     landing with a simulated engine out or completing a power-off 180-degree
                     accuracy approach commercial-rating maneuver.

          9.12.5.2   A Low Approach. A low approach is executed when an aircraft intends to
                     overfly the runway, maintaining runway heading but not landing. Aircraft
                     flying practice instrument approaches commonly use this.


                                                  11

6/6/23                                                                                    AC 90-66C


         9.12.5.3   An Overhead Approach. An overhead approach is normally performed by
                    aerobatic or high-performance aircraft and involves a quick 180-degree turn
                    and descent at the approach end of the runway before turning to land
                    (described in the AIM, Paragraph 5-4-27, Overhead Approach Maneuver).