The effects of GPS/GNSS jamming and/or spoofing have been observed by crews in various
phases of flight. In some cases, these effects led to re-routing or diversions, due to the inability to
perform safe instrument procedures. The magnitude of the issues generated by these disruptions would
depend upon the impacted area, the duration of the event, type of aircraft, type of avionics, and the phase
of flight of the affected aircraft. To improve analysis and dissemination of these issues, the FAA stresses
the need for “real time” pilot reporting to ATC and the use of the Pilot Reporting site, Report a GPS
Anomaly | Federal Aviation Administration, (https://www.faa.gov/air_traffic/nas/gps_reports) for
reporting of GPS/GNSS anomalies, to enable tracking and mitigation. Safety impacts should be reported
through normal safety channels.

Aircraft operators should be aware of impacts to their specific aircraft systems identified by Original
Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs). Manufacturers, operators, and ATC should be aware of the general
impacts of GPS/GNSS interference, jamming, and spoofing. such as:

Distributed by: Flight Standards

   •   Inability to use GPS/GNSS for navigation;
   •   Inability to use hybrid GPS/GNSS inertial systems for navigation;
   •   Loss of area navigation (RNAV) capability, to include required navigation performance (RNP);
   •   Unreliable triggering of Terrain Avoidance and Warning systems (TAWS);
   •   Inaccurate aircraft position on navigation display (e.g. moving map and electronic flight bag);
   •   Loss of or erroneous Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) outputs;
   •   Unanticipated effects to use of conventional navigation aids (e.g. inability to autotune);
   •   Unanticipated position-dependent flight management system effects (e.g. insufficient fuel
       indication)
   •   Failure or degradation of Air Traffic Management (ATM) infrastructure and its associated systems
       reliant on GPS/GNSS, resulting in potential airspace infringements and/or route deviations.