                                                                                                 SAFO
                                                                                                 Safety Alert for Operators

                                                                                                 SAFO 23002
 U.S. Department                                                                                 DATE: 03/22/23
 of Transportation
 Federal Aviation                                                                                Flight Standards Service
 Administration                                                                                  Washington, DC

http://www.faa.gov/other_visit/aviation_industry/airline_operators/airline_safety/safo
A SAFO contains important safety information and may include recommended action. Besides the specific action
recommended in a SAFO, an alternative action may be as effective in addressing the safety issue named in the SAFO. The
contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This
document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.

Subject: Aviation Safety Call to Action.

Purpose: This SAFO informs the aviation community that several highly visible and notable recent
events demonstrate the need for continued vigilance and attention to mitigation of safety risks. This
SAFO applies to all aircraft operations conducted under Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14
CFR) Parts 91, 91 subpart K (Part 91K), 121, 125, 129, and 135.

Background: In recent months, a number of notable and high visibility events have occurred in the
National Airspace System (NAS). While the overall numbers do not reflect an increase in incidents and
occurrences, the potential severity of these events is concerning. Six serious runway incursions have
occurred since January 2023, including an incident at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York
City involving a taxiing aircraft narrowly avoiding a departing aircraft and a landing aircraft coming
within 100 feet of a departing aircraft at Austin-Bergstrom International Airport in Texas.

In February 2023, the acting Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) issued a Call to
Action comprised of a series of events and initiatives to ensure focus and attention on risks to the aviation
system. Senior leaders from the FAA, other government agencies, commercial and general aviation
operators, labor partners and others attended a Safety Summit on March 15, 2023. Attendees discussed
these recent incidents, as well as ways to enhance aviation safety.

Discussion: Safety management requires adapting to continual change. Effective safety management is
designed to detect emerging safety issues, assess the level of risk and address those risks through
mitigations. Those mitigations may be a change in processes, procedures or training. Operators should
evaluate information collected through their safety management processes, identify hazards, increase and
improve safety communications with employees and enact mitigations. Safety management systems,
policies and procedures must be able to account for a high rate of change.

Recommended Action: Recent events have highlighted several areas of focus. Directors of Operations,
Chief Pilots, Directors of Training, Check Airmen, Directors of Safety, Program Managers, Pilots and
Operators should review the following items and consider taking additional steps to ensure operations are
conducted at the highest level of safety, including changes to procedures or training, if appropriate.


Distributed by: Flight Standards

   • Use all available internal communication processes to specifically highlight recent events and
     existing issues.

   • Reinforce adherence to published processes and procedures, including checklists, Air Traffic
     Control instructions, and internal company procedures.

   • Ensure pilots and flight attendants have the same understanding of what “sterile flight deck” means
     and the risks associated with extraneous communication during this time.

   • Explore helpful resources available for all pilots at: FAA Safety Team - FAASafety.gov.

   • Encourage crews to diligently follow Crew Resource Management (CRM) procedures and principles
     to control workload and reduce distractions.

   • Encourage personnel to identify and report existing and emerging safety issues through voluntary
     reporting programs and understand the usefulness of the voluntary reporting system.

   • Review information about runway safety here: Runway Safety | Federal Aviation Administration
     (faa.gov).

   • Review the following previously published SAFOs:
     o 17012, High Collision Risk During Runway Crossing;
     o 11004, Runway Incursion Prevention Actions;
     o 08001, Flightcrew techniques and procedures to enhance taxi, pre-takeoff, and after landing
       safety to reduce the risk of runway incursions.

   • Apply Safety Management System principles to analyze safety data and assess risk associated with
     emerging hazards. Evaluate existing risk mitigations to determine if they are effectively controlling
     risk, or if additional action is required.

Contact: Questions or comments regarding this SAFO should be directed to the Air Transportation
Division at 9-AFS-200-Correspondence@faa.gov or the General Aviation & Commercial Division at 9-
AFS-800-Correspondence@faa.gov.


Distributed by: Flight Standards