---
handbook: phak
edition: FAA-H-8083-25C
chapter_number: 3
section_title: The Powerplant
faa_pages: 3-7
section_number: 4
subsection_number: 5
source_url: https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/handbooks_manuals/aviation/faa-h-8083-25c.pdf
---

# The Powerplant

The Powerplant
The powerplant usually includes both the engine and the
propeller. The primary function of the engine is to provide
the power to turn the propeller. It also generates electrical
power, provides a vacuum source for some flight instruments,
and in most single-engine airplanes, provides a source of
heat for the pilot and passengers. [Figure 3-13] The engine
is covered by a cowling, or a nacelle, which are both types
of covered housing. The purpose of the cowling or nacelle
is to streamline the flow of air around the engine and to help
cool the engine by ducting air around the cylinders.
The propeller, mounted on the front of the engine, translates
the rotating force of the engine into thrust, a forward acting
force that helps move the airplane through the air. A propeller
is a rotating airfoil that produces thrust through aerodynamic
action. A high-pressure area is formed at the back of the
propeller’s airfoil, and low pressure is produced at the face of
the propeller, similar to the way lift is generated by an airfoil
used as a lifting surface or wing. This pressure differential
develops thrust from the propeller, which in turn pulls the
airplane forward. Engines may be turned around to be pushers
with the propeller at the rear.
There are two significant factors involved in the design
of a propeller that impact its effectiveness. The angle of a

Engine
Cowling
Propeller
Figure 3-13. Engine compartment.
propeller blade, as measured against the hub of the propeller,
keeps the angle of attack (AOA) (See definition in Glossary)
relatively constant along the span of the propeller blade,
reducing or eliminating the possibility of a stall. The amount
of lift being produced by the propeller is directly related to
the AOA, which is the angle at which the relative wind meets
the blade. The AOA continuously changes during the flight
depending upon the direction of the aircraft.
The pitch is defined as the distance a propeller would travel in
one revolution if it were turning in a solid. These two factors
combine to allow a measurement of the propeller’s efficiency.
Propellers are usually matched to a specific aircraft/
powerplant combination to achieve the best efficiency at a
particular power setting, and they pull or push depending on
how the engine is mounted.
