                                                                                                   SAFO
                                                                                                   Safety Alert for Operators

                                                                                                   SAFO 24002
U.S. Department                                                                                    DATE: 01/25/24
of Transportation
Federal Aviation                                                                                  Flight Standards Service
Administration                                                                                    Washington, DC

http://www.faa.gov/other_visit/aviation_industry/airline_operators/airline_safety/safo/all_safos___________
A SAFO contains important safety information and may include recommended action. Besides the specific action
recommended in a SAFO, an alternative action may be as effective in addressing the safety issue named in the SAFO. The
contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This
document is intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.

Subject: Recognizing and Mitigating Global Positioning System (GPS) / Global Navigation Satellite
System (GNSS) Disruptions.

Purpose: This SAFO provides information and guidance to operators and manufacturers regarding
operations in a GPS/GNSS disrupted environment.

Background: Recent GPS/GNSS jamming and spoofing activities reported by civil air operators
operating globally pose a potential safety of flight risk to civil aviation. GPS/GNSS disruptions often
occur in and around conflict zones, military operations areas, and areas of counter unmanned aircraft
systems (UAS) protection. The term GNSS includes satellite augmentation systems.

The recent jamming and spoofing incidents may pose increased safety of flight risks due to possible loss
of situational awareness and increased pilot and regional Air Traffic Control (ATC) workload issues. Due
to the increasing frequency of GPS/GNSS disruptions, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
recommends flightcrews put additional emphasis on closely monitoring aircraft equipment performance
for any discrepancies or anomalies, promptly informing ATC of any apparent GPS/GNSS degradation,
and being prepared to operate without GPS/GNSS navigation systems.

Discussion: The effects of GPS/GNSS jamming and/or spoofing have been observed by crews in various
phases of flight. In some cases, these effects led to re-routing or diversions, due to the inability to
perform safe instrument procedures. The magnitude of the issues generated by these disruptions would
depend upon the impacted area, the duration of the event, type of aircraft, type of avionics, and the phase
of flight of the affected aircraft. To improve analysis and dissemination of these issues, the FAA stresses
the need for “real time” pilot reporting to ATC and the use of the Pilot Reporting site, Report a GPS
Anomaly | Federal Aviation Administration, (https://www.faa.gov/air_traffic/nas/gps_reports) for
reporting of GPS/GNSS anomalies, to enable tracking and mitigation. Safety impacts should be reported
through normal safety channels.

Aircraft operators should be aware of impacts to their specific aircraft systems identified by Original
Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs). Manufacturers, operators, and ATC should be aware of the general
impacts of GPS/GNSS interference, jamming, and spoofing. such as:


Distributed by: Flight Standards

   •   Inability to use GPS/GNSS for navigation;
   •   Inability to use hybrid GPS/GNSS inertial systems for navigation;
   •   Loss of area navigation (RNAV) capability, to include required navigation performance (RNP);
   •   Unreliable triggering of Terrain Avoidance and Warning systems (TAWS);
   •   Inaccurate aircraft position on navigation display (e.g. moving map and electronic flight bag);
   •   Loss of or erroneous Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) outputs;
   •   Unanticipated effects to use of conventional navigation aids (e.g. inability to autotune);
   •   Unanticipated position-dependent flight management system effects (e.g. insufficient fuel
       indication)
   •   Failure or degradation of Air Traffic Management (ATM) infrastructure and its associated systems
       reliant on GPS/GNSS, resulting in potential airspace infringements and/or route deviations.

Recommended Action: Prior to departure, operators should be aware of potential risk locations, check
for any relevant Notices to Air Missions (NOTAMs), plan fuel contingencies, and research alternative
conventional arrival/approach procedures at the destination and all alternate airports. When available,
operators should plan to use conventional Navigational Aids (NAVAIDs) in these locations. The FAA
recommends that each operator follow the detailed guidance from their respective OEM.

During flight, the FAA recommends operators:

   1. Be vigilant for any indication that the aircraft’s GPS/GNSS is being disrupted by reviewing the
      manufacturer’s guidance for that specific aircraft type and avionics equipage. Verify the aircraft
      position by means of conventional NAVAIDs, when available. Indications of disruption may
      include:
      • Changes in actual navigation performance
      • Aircraft clock changes (e.g., incorrect time)
      • Incorrect Flight Management System (FMS) position
      • Large shift in displayed GPS/GNSS position
      • Primary flight display (PFD)/navigation display (ND) warnings about position error
      • Other aircraft reporting clock issues, position errors, or requesting vectors
   2. Assess operational risks and limitations linked to the loss of GPS/GNSS capability, including any
      on-board systems requiring inputs from a GPS/GNSS signal.
   3. Ensure NAVAIDs critical to the operation for the intended route/approach are available.
   4. Remain prepared to revert to conventional instrument flight procedures.
   5. Promptly report disruption to ATC, followed by a detailed written report post flight at: Report a
      GPS Anomaly | Federal Aviation Administration and through normal safety channels when safety
      effects are encountered.

Contact: Direct questions or comments regarding this SAFO to the Flight Technologies and Procedures
Division, Flight Operations Group at (202) 267-8790 or e-mail: 9-AWA-AVS-AFS410@faa.gov.


Distributed by: Flight Standards