                                                                                                  InFO
                                                                                                  Information for Operators

                                                                                                  InFO 25001
U.S. Department                                                                                   DATE: 01/16/25
of Transportation
Federal Aviation                                                                                  Flight Standards Service
Administration                                                                                    Washington, DC

https://www.faa.gov/other_visit/aviation_industry/airline_operators/airline_safety/info/all_infos___________
An InFO contains valuable information for operators that should help them meet certain administrative, regulatory, or
operational requirements, with relatively low urgency or impact on safety. The contents of this document do not have the force
and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the
public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.

Subject: Work Flexibility for Lactating Flightcrew Member(s)/Crewmember(s) Onboard Aircraft.

Purpose: This InFO provides information and resources to Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations
(14 CFR) part 121 air carriers (this information may also be useful for parts 91, 125 and 135 operators),
developing or reviewing their policies and procedures for flightcrew member(s) and/or crewmember(s)
who are lactating to express breast milk. For the purposes of this InFO, the terms “Flightcrew member(s)
and Crewmember(s)” will hereafter be referred to as “crewmembers.”

Background: H.R.3935 - FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024, Title IV – Aerospace Workforce, Sec. 421.
Crewmember pumping guidance, directs the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to issue guidance to
part 121 air carriers relating to crewmember expression of breast milk on aircraft during noncritical
phases of flight. In producing such guidance, Sec. 421 provides that the FAA must consider multiple
methods of expressing breast milk that could be used by crewmembers, including the use of wearable
lactation technology, and ensure that any guidance does not require an air carrier or foreign air carrier to
incur significant expense, such as through:
  • The addition of an extra crewmember in response to providing a break;
  • Removal or retrofitting of seats on the aircraft; or
  • Modification or retrofitting of an aircraft.

Discussion: The aviation industry is a cornerstone of global connectivity that requires a workforce to
navigate rigorous schedules and complex responsibilities. This InFO addresses the safety related roles and
challenges of lactating crewmembers, and suggests Directors of Safety, Operations, In-Flight Services,
and Training develop mitigation strategies to ensure safe operation of the aircraft is not compromised.
Operators and crewmembers should work collaboratively to develop appropriate and safe policies
regarding lactating crewmembers. FAA regulations allow for expression of breast milk by lactating
crewmembers; however, expression of breast milk must be accomplished within the current regulatory
framework, for which the underlying priority is safe aircraft operations.

Existing FAA Regulations and Guidance: When developing policies regarding lactating crewmembers,
operators should follow all established guidance to ensure policies do not create regulatory
noncompliance or increase risk to the safety of flight. Existing FAA safety regulations provide


Distributed by: Flight Standards

appropriate latitude for flight crewmembers to leave their station in connection with physiological needs,
including their need to express breast milk. Utilizing existing regulations and guidance will ensure the
safety of each flight is maintained. Areas of consideration within existing regulations are:
  • In accordance with § 5.1, all part 121 air carriers must develop and implement a Safety Management
    System, which includes systematic procedures, practices, and policies for the management of safety
    risk in accordance with part 5.
    • If an operator chooses to install a privacy curtain that alters the aircraft in any way to accommodate
      lactating crewmembers, the operator must utilize the current process to obtain a supplemental type
      certificate (STC) in accordance with § 21.113.
    • Crewmembers may use cloth “nursing covers” to maintain privacy while pumping, consistent with
      FAA regulations.
  • A crewmember must be able to operate the aircraft or perform other required duties in a safe manner
    in accordance with § 61.53.
  • To comply with §§ 91.21 and 121.306, the aircraft operator must determine that the use of portable
    electronic devices (PED) will not interfere with an aircraft’s navigation or communication systems.
    For more information, reference the Aircraft PED Tolerance Determination section below.
  • During takeoff and landing, required flight attendants (F/A) shall be located as near as practicable to
    required floor-level exits and shall be uniformly distributed throughout the airplane in order to provide
    the most effective egress of passengers in the event of an emergency evacuation. During taxi, flight
    attendants required by this section must remain at their duty stations with safety belts and shoulder
    harnesses fastened except to perform duties related to the safety of the airplane and its occupant in
    accordance with § 121.391.
  • Crew resource management is vital to ensuring all in flight announcements and cabin safety duties are
    accomplished in accordance with § 121.404. Examples of crew resource management strategies
    include seatbelt announcements and compliance checks, prelanding announcements and compliance
    checks, lavatory checks, flight deck door procedures, and adequate crewmember availability in case of
    an emergency.
  • No flight crewmember may engage in, nor may any pilot-in-command (PIC) permit, any activity
    during a critical phase of flight which could distract any flight crewmember from the performance of
    his or her duties or which could interfere in any way with the proper conduct of those duties in
    accordance with § 121.542.
  • A required flight crewmember may leave the assigned duty station if the absence is in connection with
    physiological needs, including their need to express breast milk, in accordance with § 121.543.
  • Ensure crewmembers follow the operator’s approved flight deck door opening procedures in
    accordance with §§ 121.547, 121.584, and 121.587.
  • Crewmembers are subject to applicable air carrier policies and FAA regulations for stowage of
    personal breast pumps and coolers with breast milk in aircraft compartments.

Lactation Technology: If the air carrier elects to develop policies and procedures to use lactation
technology on the flight deck, a safety risk assessment should be conducted. The assessment should
consider at a minimum the following:
  • Is there an impact of a crew member either being unavailable or having limited availability to perform
    their assigned duties.


Distributed by: Flight Standards

 • Will the use of lactation technology impede or interfere with the manipulation of the aircraft’s flight
   controls?
 • Commercial off-the-shelf lactation technology is available in a variety of shapes and sizes. Is the
   breast milk containment technology robust enough to withstand unanticipated severe turbulence while
   occupying a pilot seat and manipulating the aircraft flight controls?
 • Is only one individual allowed to express breast milk on the flight deck at a given time? Can more
   than one crewmember express breast milk on the flight deck?

       Note: The air carrier determines which lactation technology is acceptable to be used on the flight
       deck for each make, model, series of aircraft operated by the air carrier in accordance with
       § 121.306(b)(6).

Wearable lactation technology that utilizes WiFi or Bluetooth functionality shall not be allowed to
connect to a crewmember’s personal PED while occupying a seat on the flight deck in accordance with §
121.542 (d), and 49 U.S.C. 44732(d)).

Aircraft PED Tolerance Determination: The FAA has published InFO 13010, Expanding Use of
Passenger Portable Electronic Devices and 13010SUP, FAA Aid to Operators for the Expanded Use of
Passenger PEDs to aid in Aircraft PED tolerance determinations to provide aircraft operators with a
method for expanding the allowance of PED use throughout various phases of flight. When followed, it
provides an acceptable method of compliance for § 91.21, § 121.306, § 125.204, or § 135.144, as
applicable, when allowing expanded use of PEDs throughout various phases of flight.

Additional Information: Additional information for PED use allowance and resources for Lactating
Crewmembers can be found at the following links:
 • PED Use:
   • FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 91.21-1, Use of Portable Electronic Devices Aboard Aircraft
   • FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 20-164, Designing and Demonstrating Aircraft Tolerance to Portable
     Electronic Devices.
   • FAA InFO 14006, Prohibition on Personal Use of Electronic Devices on the Flight Deck.

 • Resources for Lactating Crewmembers from other Federal Agencies: Other resources that may be
   useful are listed below. However, expression of breast milk must be accomplished within the current
   FAA statutory and regulatory framework, for which the underlying priority is safe aircraft operations:
   • Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health, Office of Women’s Health: Pumping and storing
     breastmilk (womenshealth.gov).
   • For information on the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act (42 U.S.C §§2000gg (2022)), Title VII of the
     Civil Rights Act (Pub. L. 88–352, 78 Stat. 241 (1964)), and the Pregnancy Discrimination Act (42
     U.S.C §§2000e(k) 1978)), please refer to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission website
     at www.eeoc.gov and the Department of Labor website at www.dol.gov.
     • Time and Place to Pump at Work: Your Rights | EEOC and DOL
     • What You Should Know About the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act | EEOC


Distributed by: Flight Standards

Recommended Action: Directors of Safety, Operations, In-Flight Services, and Training, and
Crewmembers should consider the information and resources referenced in this InFO when developing or
reviewing lactating crewmember policies and procedures to ensure work flexibility and safe operation of
the aircraft.

Contact: Questions or comments regarding this InFO should be directed to the Air Transportation
Division at 9-AFS-200-Correspondence@faa.gov.


Distributed by: Flight Standards