---
handbook: risk-management
edition: FAA-H-8083-2A
chapter_number: 11
section_title: NTSB Factual Summary Excerpts (edited)
faa_pages: '65'
section_number: 3
subsection_number: 2
source_url: https://www.faa.gov/sites/faa.gov/files/2022-06/risk_management_handbook_2A.pdf
---

# NTSB Factual Summary Excerpts (edited)

was at least “occasional,” that is, it would probably occur sometime. Consulting the risk assessment matrix, the resulting risk
is high (red) and requires mitigation to a lower level of likelihood and/or severity.
Because the airplane was located at the turf airport, avoiding risk generated by the trees warranted careful consideration. The
pilot could have greatly reduced the likelihood of an accident by flying the aircraft solo to the nearby Eugene, OR (EUG) airport
to pick up the passengers [Figure C-1]. This single action addresses both the environmental and aircraft performance risks. This
could also have reduced the external pressures.
Figure C-1. Sectional chart excerpt.
Accident Profile 2: Fatal Accident, Turboprop-Powered, Transportation
The following details pertain to this accident:
•	 Location: Morristown, NJ
•	 Date: 12/20/2011
•	 NTSB Defining Event: Loss of control in-flight
•	 NTSB Case File Number: ERA12FA115
NTSB Probable Cause
The airplane’s encounter with severe icing conditions that were characterized by high ice accretion rates and the pilot’s failure
to use command authority to depart the icing conditions in an expeditious manner, which resulted in a loss of airplane control.
NTSB Factual Summary Excerpts (edited)
The pilot departed Teterboro, NJ (TEB) on an IFR flight plan to Atlanta, GA (PDK). No evidence of a weather briefing was
found, although the pilot may have obtained weather information from non-government sources. There was an AIRMET for
moderate icing in northern New Jersey and westward from the freezing level (2,000 to 8,000 feet) to 20,000 feet. There were
numerous pilot reports of moderate to severe icing and a Center Weather Advisory (CWA) issued, as depicted in Figure C-2.
C-2
