U.S. Department
of Transportation
                                                  Advisory
Federal Aviation
Administration                                    Circular
 Subject: Currency Requirements and                Date: 4/30/18             AC No: 61-98D
          Guidance for the Flight Review and       Initiated by: AFS-800     Change:
          Instrument Proficiency Check

This advisory circular (AC) provides information for certificated pilots and flight instructors
to use in complying with the flight review required by Title 14 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (14 CFR) part 61, § 61.56 and the recent flight experience requirements of § 61.57.
This AC is directed to General Aviation (GA) pilots and flight instructors.

This AC does not apply to training programs or proficiency checks conducted pursuant
to 14 CFR part 121 or 135, nor to curriculums approved pursuant to 14 CFR part 142. Full flight
simulators (FFS) and flight training devices (FTD) may not be used for logging airman
experience or for any training, checking, or qualification credit unless qualified and approved by
the Administrator (§ 61.4). Additionally, a flight review cannot be accomplished in an FFS or
FTD unless it is used in accordance with an approved course conducted by a training center
certificated under part 142 (§ 61.56(i)(1)).


John S. Duncan
Executive Director, Flight Standards Service

4/30/18                                                                                                                        AC 61-98D


                                                             CONTENTS
Paragraph                                                                                                                                Page
Chapter 1. General ....................................................................................................................... 1-1
      1.1       Purpose of This Advisory Circular (AC) ................................................................... 1-1
      1.2       Audience .................................................................................................................... 1-1
      1.3       Where You Can Find This AC................................................................................... 1-1
      1.4       What This AC Cancels............................................................................................... 1-1
      1.5       Related 14 CFR Sections ........................................................................................... 1-1
      1.6       Related Reading Material .......................................................................................... 1-1
      1.7       Background ................................................................................................................ 1-2
      1.8       FAA Aviation English Language Standard (AELS) .................................................. 1-3
      1.9       Personal Currency Program ....................................................................................... 1-4
      1.10 Airman Certificate and/or Rating Application ........................................................... 1-5
      1.11 AC Feedback Form .................................................................................................... 1-5
Chapter 2. Reducing General Aviation Accidents ....................................................................... 2-1
      2.1       General Aviation (GA) Accidents ............................................................................. 2-1
      2.2       Manual Flight After Automation Failure ................................................................. 2-4
      2.3       Runway Incursion Risks and Avoidance ................................................................... 2-6
      2.4       Flight Instructor Responsibility and Safety Culture ................................................ 2-11
Chapter 3. Recent Flight Experience ........................................................................................... 3-1
      3.1       Recent General Experience ........................................................................................ 3-1
      3.2       Recent Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) Experience..................................................... 3-2
Chapter 4. Flight Review ............................................................................................................. 4-1
      4.1       Intent and Structure of the Flight Review .................................................................. 4-1
      4.2       Pre-Review Considerations ........................................................................................ 4-3
      4.3       Planning and Recording the Review .......................................................................... 4-5
      4.4       Postreview Considerations ......................................................................................... 4-7
Chapter 5. Instrument Proficiency Check .................................................................................... 5-1
      5.1       Structuring an Instrument Proficiency Check (IPC) .................................................. 5-1
      5.2       IPC Knowledge Portion ............................................................................................. 5-2
      5.3       IPC Skill Portion ........................................................................................................ 5-3
      5.4       Post-IPC Considerations and Recordkeeping ............................................................ 5-4


                                                                       ii

4/30/18                                                                                                                AC 61-98D


Appendix A. Resources .............................................................................................................. A-1

Appendix B. Sample Airplane Pilot’s Proficiency Practice Plan ................................................B-1

Appendix C. Sample Pilot’s Personal Aeronautical Goals ..........................................................C-1

Appendix D. Sample Flight Instructor’s Flight Review Checklist ............................................. D-1

Appendix E. Regulatory Review Guide....................................................................................... E-1

Appendix F. Sample Flight Review Checklist ............................................................................. F-1

Appendix G. Sample Pilot’s Instrument Experience Summary.................................................. G-1

Appendix H. Sample Instrument Training and Proficiency Plan ............................................... H-1

Appendix J. Sample Flight Instructor’s Instrument Proficiency Check Checklist ....................... J-1


                                                                  iii

4/30/18                                                                                AC 61-98D


                                  CHAPTER 1. GENERAL

 1.1 Purpose of This Advisory Circular (AC). This AC provides information to assist
     General Aviation (GA) pilots, flight instructors, and ground instructors in complying with
     the flight reviews required by Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR)
     part 61, § 61.56 and the instrument proficiency check (IPC)/recent flight experience
     requirements of § 61.57. Additionally, this AC provides critical information to enhance
     GA safety.

 1.2 Audience. The primary audience for this AC is GA pilots, flight instructors, and ground
     instructors. The secondary audience includes flight schools, collegiate aeronautical
     institutions, and stakeholders supporting GA pilot safety and training.

 1.3 Where You Can Find This AC. You can find this AC on the Federal Aviation
     Administration’s (FAA) website
     at http://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/advisory_circulars.

 1.4 What This AC Cancels. AC 61-98C, Currency Requirements and Guidance for the
     Flight Review and Instrument Proficiency Check, dated November 20, 2015, is canceled.

 1.5 Related 14 CFR Sections:

      •   Section 61.189, Flight Instructor Records.
      •   Section 61.193, Flight Instructor Privileges.
      •   Section 61.195, Flight Instructor Limitations and Qualifications.
      •   Section 61.413, What Are the Privileges of My Flight Instructor Certificate with
          a Sport Pilot Rating?
      •   Section 61.415, What Are the Limits of a Flight Instructor Certificate with a Sport Pilot
          Rating?

 1.6 Related Reading Material. Flight instructors and airmen under review should reference
     practical test standards (PTS) or Airman Certification Standards (ACS) documents
     appropriate to the certificates and ratings held by the pilot seeking a flight review or IPC
     prior to the review. You can find additional information in:

      1. Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM), official guide to basic flight
         information and air traffic control (ATC) procedures.
      2. FAA Handbooks:
          •   FAA-H-8083-3, Airplane Flying Handbook.
          •   FAA-H-8083-15, Instrument Flying Handbook.
          •   FAA-H-8083-16, Instrument Procedures Handbook.
          •   FAA-H-8083-25, Pilot’s Handbook of Aeronautical Knowledge.


                                               1-1

4/30/18                                                                                 AC 61-98D


       3. Information for Operators (InFO) 15012, Logging Instrument Approach
          Procedures (IAP), September 8, 2015.
       4. FAA ACs (current editions):
          •   AC 60-28, FAA English Language Standard for an FAA Certificate Issued Under
              14 CFR Parts 61, 63, 65, and 107.
          •   AC 61-65, Certification: Pilots and Flight and Ground Instructors.
          •   AC 61-89, Pilot Certificates: Aircraft Type Ratings (guidance on advanced training
              criteria, pilot certificates, and aircraft type ratings may also be appropriate if the
              aircraft being used requires a type rating).
          •   AC 61-136, FAA Approval of Aviation Training Devices and Their Use for
              Training and Experience.
          •   AC 91-73, Parts 91 and 135 Single Pilot, Flight School Procedures During Taxi
              Operations.
       5. The FAA, commercial sources, and industry associations such as the Aircraft
          Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA), the Experimental Aircraft
          Association (EAA), the General Aviation Manufacturers Association
          (GAMA), and the Society of Aviation and Flight Educators (SAFE) make
          many additional sources of media on pilot currency and qualification
          available.

 1.7 Background.

1.7.1 Regulatory Review. In 1997, the FAA initiated a major regulatory review and update
      of 14 CFR parts 61 and 141 to ensure that these regulations conformed to the then-current
      technological and operational environment and to address future pilot certification needs.
      This version of AC 61-98 addresses changes in technology and the operational
      environment, and their impact on recurrent training and proficiency checks. Edits to this
      AC, since the original version, have expanded the scope to include recent flight
      experience and IPCs.

       Note: The FAA no longer uses the term “Biennial Flight Review.” This term
       implied that pilots only needed currency training once every 24 calendar-months.
       The FAA encourages currency training as often as appropriate to a pilot’s
       individual needs. Consequently, the FAA now uses the term “Flight Review.”

1.7.2 GA Pilots. The FAA supports initiatives designed to encourage voluntary compliance
      with existing regulations and to maintain and further improve the GA safety record with
      a minimum of new regulations. As a result, the FAA has determined that updated
      advisory guidance is necessary with respect to the currency, proficiency, and
      qualification needs of GA pilots. The guidance contained in this version of AC 61-98
      provides such information and accomplishes the goals of the personal currency program,
      flight review, and IPC.


                                               1-2

4/30/18                                                                                  AC 61-98D


1.7.3 Reducing GA Accidents. The FAA added important General Aviation Joint Steering
      Committee (GAJSC) findings and recommendations to AC 61-98 pertaining
      to GA accidents (see paragraph 2.1).

       1. GA pilots should become aware of this information and apply it to their
          personal currency program plans of action.
       2. Flight instructors should apply this information to their training and evaluation
          plans of action.

 1.8 FAA Aviation English Language Standard (AELS).

1.8.1 FAA Regulatory English Language Eligibility Requirements. AELS directly affects flight
      safety. Regulations require pilots to meet and maintain English language skill
      requirements for all grades of pilot certificates issued under part 61. When a flight
      instructor conducts a flight evaluation and/or flight training event, the flight instructor
      should identify any pilot who does not meet English language skill requirements and take
      appropriate action. Finally, all training, checking, or evaluation will be conducted in
      English. AC 60-28 provides information and guidance regarding English language
      standards required by part 61.

1.8.2 Flight Instructor Evaluation. The IPC and the flight review are both evaluations of
      a pilot’s ability to conduct a safe flight. Safety-related issues concerning language
      barriers to communications may arise if a pilot does not meet FAA English language skill
      standards. A flight instructor should continually evaluate the pilot’s English language
      skills during any flight evaluation or training event that he or she conducts and endorse
      the individual’s training record or logbook in English for the training and endorsement
      provided.

1.8.3 Flight Instructor Determination. A flight instructor conducting a flight review or IPC
      should not endorse the evaluation as satisfactorily completed if he or she determines that
      the pilot under review does not meet FAA English language skill standards. When a pilot
      has not accomplished a flight review satisfactorily, the evaluating instructor should
      endorse the pilot’s logbook to indicate only the training received (as is the case with any
      unsuccessful flight review). There is no provision in the regulation for the failure of
      a flight review; therefore, there should be no logbook endorsement reflecting a failure.
      In the event the flight review is not successful, due to the flight instructor’s doubt that the
      pilot under review meets FAA English language skill requirements, the flight instructor
      should provide a logbook entry for training received, advise the pilot of the flight
      instructor’s finding, and notify his or her responsible Flight Standards office for further
      action. See paragraph 1.8.4 for additional flight instructor actions.

1.8.4 Responsible Flight Standards Office Evaluation. Although the FAA expects flight
      instructors to be aware of and follow the guidelines provided in AC 60-28, the FAA
      does not expect flight instructors to be responsible for a conclusive evaluation of an
      airman’s ability to meet the FAA AELS. Only an FAA aviation safety inspector (ASI)
      can determine if an applicant, student, or certificated pilot meets the FAA regulatory
      English language eligibility requirements. However, if a flight instructor questions the


                                                1-3

4/30/18                                                                                AC 61-98D


       ability of the airman under training or evaluation to read, speak, write, and understand the
       English language at a level that meets FAA English language standards, then that flight
       instructor must refer the airman to the responsible Flight Standards office for evaluation
       by an FAA ASI. Thus, the FAA ASI will make the determination. The flight instructor
       should also provide the airman’s contact information to the responsible Flight Standards
       office.

 1.9 Personal Currency Program.

1.9.1 Currency Criteria. Pilots should design a currency program tailored to their individual
      operating environments and needs, which should emphasize proficiency beyond the
      minimum currency requirements. In most cases, pilots may integrate currency criteria
      with normal operations to reduce the need for separate currency flights. For example,
      pilots could incorporate additional takeoffs and landings, instrument approach procedures
      (IAP), or specialized takeoffs and landings, such as short or soft field, into a planned
      flight. In most cases, pilots should consider the need for currency beyond that specified
      by 14 CFR.

1.9.2 The FAA Safety Team (FAASTeam). The FAA strongly encourages pilots to participate
      in the FAASTeam’s Pilot Proficiency Program (WINGS), which includes numerous
      forms of training media such as online programs and recommended topics for pilots
      to review with flight instructors. Additionally, the FAASTeam conducts safety seminars,
      which are open to the public. You can find the FAASTeam website at
      https://www.faasafety.gov/.

1.9.3 Aviation Publications and Commercially Developed Materials. Pilots should also explore
      the wide range of publications and other commercially developed materials available for
      use in personal currency programs. To ensure staying up to date in regulatory changes
      and flying techniques, the FAA also encourages pilots to read aviation periodicals
      on a regular basis.

1.9.4 Additional Sources for Developing a Personal Currency Program. For assistance
      in developing a personal currency program, pilots may consult a wide variety of sources.
      These sources include:

       •   Pilot examiners,
       •   Pilot schools,
       •   Individual flight instructors,
       •   FAASTeam Program Managers, and
       •   FAASTeam representatives.

       Note: For information on local sources, pilots should contact their FAASTeam
       Program Manager at the responsible Flight Standards office. You can find your
       responsible FAASTeam Program Manager in the FAASTeam Online Directory at
       https://faasafety.gov/FAASTApp/directory/default.aspx. You can find your


                                               1-4

4/30/18                                                                              AC 61-98D


        responsible Flight Standards office at http://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/
        field_offices/fsdo/. You can find FAASTeam activities, courses, seminars, and
        webinars, plus other free FAA resources, at http://www.faasafety.gov/.

 1.10 Airman Certificate and/or Rating Application.

1.10.1 Revised Airman Application Form. The FAA frequently updates FAA Form 8710-1,
       Airman Certificate and/or Rating Application, to meet the needs of the airman
       certification process and the aviation community. Flight instructors, pilots, and
       stakeholders should note that the latest FAA Form 8710-1 contains enhancements that
       include a new field for a flight review and another for IPC.

1.10.2 Flight Review and IPC. When a pilot satisfactorily completes a flight review or IPC, the
       applicant should provide, and the evaluating flight instructor should submit, a completed
       FAA Form 8710-1 to the Airmen Certification Branch (AFB-720). The FAA does not
       require FAA Form 8710-1 for a pilot’s flight review or IPC; however, the FAA strongly
       encourages all applicants and flight instructors to follow this recommendation. When
       submitted, AFB-720 will add the application to the pilot’s FAA record. Pilots should
       ensure that their data is current, because up-to-date records benefit everyone.
       For example, a pilot’s total flight time and aeronautical experience determines insurance
       premiums. If a pilot loses his or her logbook, an FAA record is on file and available.
       Nevertheless, submitting FAA Form 8710-1 for a flight review or IPC is optional.

1.10.3 Preferred Method. The preferred method for submitting an Airman Certificate and/or
       Rating Application is through the Integrated Airman Certification and/or Rating
       Application (IACRA) system. IACRA is the web-based certification/rating application
       that guides the user through the FAA’s airman application process. IACRA validates
       data. It also uses electronic signatures to protect the information’s integrity and
       eliminates paper forms.

        •   You can find IACRA at https://iacra.faa.gov/IACRA.
        •   You can find FAA Form 8710-1 at http://www.faa.gov/forms/.

 1.11 AC Feedback Form. For your convenience, the AC Feedback Form is the last page
      of this AC. Note any deficiencies found, clarifications needed, or suggested
      improvements regarding the contents of this AC on the Feedback Form.


                                               1-5

4/30/18                                                                              AC 61-98D


            CHAPTER 2. REDUCING GENERAL AVIATION ACCIDENTS

 2.1 General Aviation (GA) Accidents. The General Aviation Joint Steering Committee
     (GAJSC) is the primary vehicle for government–industry cooperation, communication,
     and coordination on GA accident reduction. GAJSC findings reveal common pilot errors,
     while GAJSC recommendations provide mitigation strategies to reduce GA fatalities.
     Pilots and flight instructors should apply GAJSC findings and recommendations to their
     plans of action as they pertain to personal currency programs, pilot proficiency training,
     flight reviews, and instrument proficiency checks (IPC). For these reasons, the FAA
     encourages pilots and flight instructors to keep informed on GAJSC findings and
     recommendations. You can find additional information about the GAJSC online at
     http://www.gajsc.org/.

2.1.1 Loss of Control (LOC). The GAJSC cites LOC as one of the six most critical and
      common causes of GA accidents. Further, LOC was the number one cause
      of GA fatalities from 2001 through 2010. LOC refers to aircraft accidents that result from
      situations in which a pilot should have maintained (or should have regained) aircraft
      control, but failed to do so. In some cases, training accidents occurred because the pilots
      were not in agreement as to who should be manipulating the flight controls.
      A recommended three-step process of exchange includes a verbal handoff from the pilot
      flying, verbal acceptance by the pilot taking over, and a verbal and visual confirmation
      that the exchange has taken place by the pilot relinquishing control. This procedure
      should be briefed before flight, and include a method to relinquish and take control of the
      aircraft when normal communications are not possible (e.g., tandem cockpit interphone
      failure or wind noise). Pilots and flight instructors are encouraged to practice and use
      aircraft control handoff procedures on every instructional flight. In addition, flight
      instructors need to maintain diligence while providing instruction. A flight instructor
      should always be in a position to take over control of the aircraft when doubt exists as to
      the safe outcome of any maneuver. The FAA reminds pilots and flight instructors to
      regularly evaluate (and elevate) procedures and skills to avoid, recognize, and recover
      from emergencies such as LOC.

       Note: Future updates to this AC may address other causes of GA accidents,
       including aeronautical decision-making (ADM), weather, controlled flight into
       terrain (CFIT), and system failure.

2.1.2 Pilot Proficiency. Studies have shown that LOC usually occurs when pilots lack
      proficiency. Conditions exceeding personal skill limitations can present themselves
      at any time and can occur unexpectedly. In this event, the pilot should be able to avoid
      being startled, make appropriate decisions in a timely manner, and be able to exercise
      skills at a proficiency level he or she may not have maintained or attained since acquired
      during initial training. This makes personal currency programs and proficiency training
      essential. Personal currency programs serve to develop and maintain pilot proficiency by
      promoting attributes such as aeronautical knowledge, aeronautical skill, and ADM. These
      attributes collectively determine the degree of aeronautical ability a pilot possesses.
      Highly proficient pilots are better able to avoid or manage an in-flight emergency in
      a safe and efficient manner. Consequently, the GAJSC recommends that pilots place


                                              2-1

4/30/18                                                                                  AC 61-98D


       emphasis on their specific proficiency needs by including training that may exceed
       regulatory minimum currency requirements.

2.1.3 Traffic Pattern Operations.

       2.1.3.1    LOC accidents often occur while pilots are maneuvering at low altitude and
                  airspeed, such as in an airport traffic pattern. Pilots should adopt, and flight
                  instructors should promote, training programs designed to reduce the risk of
                  GA accidents in traffic pattern operations. Flight instructors should provide
                  training to mitigate the three areas of highest risk involving maneuvering an
                  airplane in an airport traffic pattern. The first area is the risk of a departure
                  stall; the second area is the risk of LOC if attempting to return to the field
                  after an engine failure on takeoff; and the third area is the risk of LOC on the
                  base to final turn.

       2.1.3.2    Flight instructors should emphasize training that ensures that pilots of small
                  single-engine airplanes depart in coordinated flight at the best-rate-of-climb
                  speed (VY) for normal takeoffs, and maintain this speed to the altitude
                  necessary for a safe return to the airport in the event of an emergency. Flight
                  instructors should train pilots of single-engine airplanes not to return to the
                  field after an engine failure unless altitude and best glide requirements permit.
                  Accordingly, flight instructors should provide training that emphasizes the
                  correct speeds at which light twin-piston aircraft depart the runway. Flight
                  instructors should emphasize that a departure at the best-angle-of-climb speed
                  (VX) is used for obstacle clearance and short-field takeoff procedures.

       2.1.3.3    Flight instructors should also emphasize the risks and potential consequences
                  of climbing out at speeds less or greater than what is required for a particular
                  type of takeoff. Flight instructors should train pilots of single-engine airplanes
                  not to return to the field after an engine failure unless altitude and best glide
                  requirements permit a safe return. Therefore, flight instructors should not
                  routinely train pilots to make a 180-degree turn from a simulated engine
                  failure while climbing. However, this training should occur at a safe altitude.
                  A critical part of conducting this training is for the flight instructor to be fully
                  aware of the need for diligence, the need to perform this maneuver properly,
                  and to avoid any potential for an accelerated stall in the turn. It is essential for
                  a pilot to know the altitude that will be lost in a 180-degree turn, in the
                  specific make and model (M/M) flown, if and when a pilot considers turning
                  back to the departure airport at best glide. During the before-takeoff check, the
                  expected loss of altitude in the turn, plus a sufficient safety factor, should be
                  related to the absolute altitude at which a turnback may be attempted.
                  In addition, the effect of existing winds on the preferred direction of
                  a turnback should be briefed.

       2.1.3.4    Flight instructors should also teach pilots to reject an approach and initiate
                  a go-around when the pilot cannot maintain a stabilized approach. The GAJSC
                  recommends that pilots and flight instructors emphasize stabilized approach


                                                2-2

4/30/18                                                                                AC 61-98D


                  and landing proficiency and conduct stabilized approaches as a standard
                  practice. Flight reviews and IPCs should emphasize evaluating a pilot’s ADM,
                  departure skills, and ability to establish and maintain a stabilized approach and
                  landing, while applying effective crosswind techniques to avoid the risk of
                  LOC when maneuvering in an airport traffic pattern. Effective scenario-based
                  training, emphasizing ADM, departures, and establishing and maintaining
                  a stabilized approach to a landing, reduces the risk of LOC in an airport traffic
                  pattern. Many of the principles discussed in this paragraph apply to
                  multiengine aircraft, but do not apply to single-engine operations in the
                  multiengine airplane. Flight instructors should emphasize the correct speeds at
                  which light twin-piston aircraft are operated in the traffic pattern and provide
                  training in response to an engine failure in a variety of situations.

2.1.4 Criteria for Stabilized Approaches Conducted in GA Airplanes. Under most
      circumstances, the airplane should be stabilized by 1,000 feet above airport elevation
      in instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) and by 500 feet above airport elevation
      during straight-in approaches in visual meteorological conditions (VMC). Pilots should
      monitor at least seven major elements that define a stabilized approach in a GA airplane.
      The FAA considers an approach to touchdown to be stabilized when the airplane meets
      all of the following criteria, with only minor deviations:

       2.1.4.1    Glidepath. The airplane is on the correct flightpath. Typically, the glidepath
                  is 3 degrees to the runway touchdown zone (TDZ) (obstructions permitting).

       2.1.4.2    Heading. The airplane is tracking the extended centerline to the runway with
                  only minor heading/pitch changes necessary to correct for wind or turbulence
                  to maintain alignment. Bank angle should not exceed 15 degrees on final
                  approach.

       2.1.4.3    Airspeed. The pilot maintains a constant target airspeed within +10/-5 knots
                  indicated airspeed (KIAS), which is usually at, but no lower than, the
                  recommended landing speed specified in the pilot’s operating handbook
                  (POH)/Airplane Flight Manual (AFM), approved placards/markings, or
                  1.3 times the stall speed or minimum steady flight speed at which the airplane
                  is controllable in the landing configuration (VSO), if not specified.

                  Note: Most small airplanes maintain a speed well in excess
                  of 1.3 times VSO on an instrument approach (pilot’s discretion).
                  An airplane with a VSO of 50 knots has a normal approach speed of
                  65 knots. However, this same airplane may maintain 90 knots
                  (1.8 VSO) while on the final segment of an instrument approach. Pilots
                  generally select an appropriate approach speed for the prevailing
                  weather, aircraft, traffic, and performance conditions, but not less than
                  1.3 VSO. However, aircraft are usually slowed to a normal landing
                  speed when on the final approach just prior to landing. Refer to the
                  FAA Instrument Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-15), Chapter 4,
                  Aerodynamic Factors, page 4-9, paragraph titled Small Airplanes.


                                               2-3

4/30/18                                                                              AC 61-98D


       2.1.4.4    Configuration. The airplane is in the correct landing configuration with flaps
                  as required, landing gear extended, and the airplane in trim.

       2.1.4.5    Rate of Descent. Descent rate is a constant and generally no greater than
                  500 feet per minute (fpm). If a descent greater than 500 fpm is required due
                  to approach considerations, it should be reduced prior to 300 feet above
                  ground level (AGL) and well before the landing flare and touchdown phase.

       2.1.4.6    Power Setting. Power setting is appropriate for the airplane configuration and
                  is not below the minimum power for approach as defined by the POH/AFM.

       2.1.4.7    Checklists/Briefings. All briefings and checklists (except the landing
                  checklist) are completed prior to initiating the approach.

                  Note: For a typical GA piston airplane in a traffic pattern, if the
                  approach becomes unstabilized below 300 feet AGL, the pilot should
                  initiate an immediate go-around.

2.1.5 IMC. Another area where pilots have experienced LOC is while maneuvering in IMC.
      Vertigo or spatial disorientation has been a significant factor in many aircraft accidents.
      The common result when a noninstrument-rated pilot inadvertently continues flight into
      IMC is spatial disorientation of the pilot and LOC. Pilots who are instrument rated, but
      not instrument proficient, are also susceptible. Recovery from LOC in IMC can be nearly
      impossible without skills and competency. Additionally, instrument-rated pilots
      maneuvering in IMC who fail to prioritize pilot workload properly and use Crew
      Resource Management (CRM) or Single Pilot Resource Management (SRM) may
      become inattentive or distracted and lose situational awareness (SA), which too often can
      lead to LOC. The GAJSC determined that pilots and flight instructors need to emphasize
      effective preflight planning and pilot proficiency to reduce the risk of LOC in IMC.

       Note: LOC is not limited to the examples provided above. Other examples
       of areas where pilots have experienced LOC include environmentally induced
       aircraft upsets, system malfunction/failure-induced upsets, and exceeding
       personal skills.

 2.2 Manual Flight After Automation Failure. Pilots and aircraft owners have taken
     advantage of modern avionics and flight automation equipment. “Glass cockpits” are
     available for virtually every new aircraft, as well as for many legacy and experimental
     aircraft. Global Positioning Systems (GPS), positioning on a moving map, real-time
     weather, terrain/traffic awareness, and modern autopilots have made a significant
     presence in the GA fleet. Pilots also employ handheld equipment not installed in the
     aircraft much more frequently than in the past. This equipment can make flight operations
     safer and help avoid LOC situations; however, pilots should be proficient in all
     automation tools and know the system limitations. The FAA reminds flight instructors
     conducting flight reviews and IPCs to ensure that a pilot under evaluation is proficient
     with the automated system and knows what to do if it fails.


                                               2-4

4/30/18                                                                             AC 61-98D


2.2.1 Pilot Knowledge. Pilots should learn their aircraft’s systems, limits, and recommended
      procedures before a pilot can fly the aircraft safely. This is especially important for
      technically advanced aircraft (TAA) equipped with the automated avionics described
      in paragraph 2.2 or flight automation systems (e.g., flight management system (FMS)
      or coupled autopilot). The FAA strongly recommends that a pilot receive a thorough
      evaluation from a qualified instructor with experience in the automation equipped in the
      specific aircraft M/M flown.

2.2.2 Reliance on Automation. Overreliance on automation or automated flight systems has
      resulted in accidents. A 2010 National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) safety study
      concluded that glass cockpit aircraft (TAA) experience a lower total accident rate, but
      a higher fatal accident rate, than the same type of aircraft equipped with conventional
      analog instrumentation. (Refer to http://www.ntsb.gov/safety/safety-studies/
      Documents/SS1001.pdf.) The NTSB study also reported, “Even before electronic
      displays became common, anecdotal reports from flight crews, as well as findings from
      accidents and research, revealed potential problems if pilots relied too heavily
      on automated systems or if they misunderstood automated system behavior” (page 6).
      Automation can lull some pilots into complacency. Furthermore, automation bias
      presented a new breed of accident by creating the potential to erode a complacent pilot’s
      manual flight skills. Automation bias refers to the willingness of the pilot to trust and
      utilize automated systems while feeling that the automation is more capable than the
      pilot. This perception may result in passive automation management (commonly referred
      to as “set and go”). Eroded skills can degrade the pilot’s ability to recognize potential
      system issues and avoid or recover from LOC. The FAA strongly recommends that pilots
      who fly aircraft with automated flight systems manually control the aircraft at times
      to maintain manual flying skills. Pilots should actively manage automation by making
      use of all systems; cross-referencing data provided by the various systems; and
      monitoring and managing flight progress such as waypoints or checkpoints. Active
      automation management ensures enhanced SA while providing the opportunity for quick
      identification of automation failure.

2.2.3 Proficiency in Manual Aircraft Control. Pilots should be proficient in manual aircraft
      control and should be able to operate the aircraft without the use of the aircraft’s
      automation. Advanced avionics and flight automation offer many levels of automation.
      Pilots need to understand that no one level of automation is appropriate for all flight
      situations. If a flight automation system failure occurs, in whole or in part, the pilot
      should possess the knowledge to address the situation. This may include isolating the
      defective components and/or manually flying the aircraft. In any event, manual flight
      may be necessary to ensure positive control of the aircraft while the pilot identifies
      problems and determines an appropriate course of action. All flight reviews conducted
      in aircraft equipped with automation should include training in manual aircraft control.
      In this case, the flight instructor should simulate failures of critical components of
      automation through safe and practical means. The instructor should never actually render
      an automated system inoperative, such as turning off switches or disengaging circuit
      breakers. For example, a flight instructor can simulate an automation failure simply by
      disengaging an integrated autopilot on an approach. The FAA strongly recommends that


                                              2-5

4/30/18                                                                                        AC 61-98D


         pilots and flight instructors strive for proficiency in manual aircraft control to mitigate the
         risk of loss of aircraft control.

    2.3 Runway Incursion Risks and Avoidance. Runway incursions, like other pilot
        deviations (PD), are usually due to pilot error. GA pilots are responsible for the largest
        percent of PDs in our National Airspace System (NAS). PDs occur in flight and on the
        ground. Airborne deviations include occurrences that result when a pilot does not
        maintain an assigned heading, altitude, or instrument procedure while conducting flight
        operations under an air traffic control (ATC) clearance, or when a pilot penetrates
        airspace requiring an ATC clearance without having received one. Ground deviations
        include taxiing, taking off or landing without clearance, not maintaining an assigned taxi
        route, and failing to hold short of an assigned clearance limit.1 Although pilot airborne
        and ground deviations are avoidable, GA PDs continue to be the largest cause of runway
        incursions. Preventing runway incursions is one of the FAA’s top priorities.2 Flight
        instructors should also provide training to GA pilots to mitigate wrong surface landing
        incidents. Recently, the FAA Air Traffic Organization (ATO) has advised of an increase
        in wrong surface landings in the NAS. For more information, please refer to Safety Alert
        for Operators (SAFO) 17010, Incorrect Airport Surface Approaches and Landings.
        To understand and mitigate the risk of a runway incursion, GA pilots and flight
        instructors should become familiar with the following information.

2.3.1 Definition. The FAA formally defines a runway incursion as “any occurrence
      at an aerodrome involving the incorrect presence of an aircraft, vehicle, or person on the
      protected area of a surface designated for the landing and take off of aircraft.”3 The FAA
      divides runway incursions into three incident (human error) types:

         2.3.1.1    Pilot Deviation (PD). A PD is an action by a pilot that violates FAA
                    regulations, such as taxiing an airplane on a runway or taxiway without
                    authorization from ATC.

         2.3.1.2    Operational Incidents (OI). An OI is an action by an air traffic controller
                    that results in either less than the required minimum separation between
                    two or more aircraft, or between an aircraft and obstacles (e.g., vehicles
                    or people); or an aircraft landing or departing on a closed runway.

         2.3.1.3    Vehicle or Pedestrian Deviations (V/PD). A V/PD is a pedestrian or vehicle
                    entering any portion of the airport movement areas (runways or taxiways)
                    without authorization from ATC.


1
  GAJSC Safety Enhancement Topic, Avoiding Pilot Deviations, September 2014:
https://www.faa.gov/news/safety_briefing/2014/media/SE_Topic_09_2014.pdf.
2
  FAA, Reducing Runway Incursions: Guidance for Airports: http://www.faa.gov/airports/airport_safety/
call_to_action/.
3
  FAA, Runway Safety: Runway Incursions: https://www.faa.gov/airports/runway_safety/news/runway_incursions/.


                                                    2-6

4/30/18                                                                                        AC 61-98D


2.3.2 Categories. There are four categories of runway incursions:

        1. Category A is a serious incident in which the pilot barely avoided a collision.
        2. Category B is an incident in which separation decreases and there
           is a significant potential for collision, which may result in a time-critical
           evasive response to avoid a collision.
        3. Category C is an incident characterized by ample time and/or distance
           to avoid a collision.
        4. Category D is an incident that meets the definition of runway incursion,
           such as the incorrect presence of a single vehicle, person, or aircraft on the
           protected area of a surface designated for the landing and take off of aircraft,
           but with no immediate safety consequences.

2.3.3 Background. PDs were responsible for 63 percent of runway incursions in fiscal year
      (FY) 2012. GA pilots were responsible for more than 80 percent of the PDs. In addition,
      OIs accounted for 20 percent of runway incursions and V/PDs accounted for 17 percent
      that year.4 For these reasons, the FAA is encouraging GA pilots and flight instructors to
      become familiar with industry best practices and mitigation procedures to avoid runway
      incursions.

2.3.4 Causal Factors of Runway Incursions. Detailed investigations of runway incursions over
      the past decade have identified three major areas (pilot errors) contributing to these
      events:5

        1. Failure to comply with ATC instructions.
        2. Lack of airport familiarity.
        3. Nonconformance with standard operating procedures.

2.3.5 Challenges. Pilot proficiency, preflight planning, taxi procedures, runway confusion,
      SA, and the use of aircraft lights are all challenges that, if not properly managed, lead
      to deviations. Adverse weather, technology limitation, and complex airport designs are
      additional challenges that contribute to PDs such as runway incursions.

2.3.6 Runway Incursion Mitigation/Avoidance. As previously noted, runway incursions are
      generally the result of pilot error. To reduce this risk, pilots should adopt effective
      mitigation strategies to avoid runway incursions. Flight instructors should offer training
      that includes runway incursion avoidance strategies. Training and procedures developed
      in compliance with FAA policies and industry best practices reduce pilot errors and

4
  FAA Office of the Inspector General Audit Report, Management Limitations May Hinder FAA’s Ability to Fully
Implement and Assess the Effectiveness of its Runway Safety Initiatives, Report Number: AV-2014-130
September 25, 2014, page 4:
https://www.oig.dot.gov/sites/default/files/FAA%20Runway%20Safety%20Program%20Audit%20Report%5E9-25-
14.pdf.
5
  FAA Pilot’s Handbook of Aeronautic Knowledge 2016, Chapter 14, page 14-31,
https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/handbooks_manuals/aviation/phak/media/pilot_handbook.pdf.


                                                    2-7

4/30/18                                                                                 AC 61-98D


      runway incursions. To meet this goal, pilots can take (and flight instructors should teach)
      the following steps:

      2.3.6.1    Step 1: Maintain Proficiency. Receiving continuing education and training
                 is an essential step that a pilot can take to ensure that he or she is proficient.
                 Each pilot is unique and no pilot is proficient in all situations. Therefore,
                 GA pilots should self-assess their aeronautical ability prior to conducting
                 a flight as pilot in command (PIC). Poor training in any skill set increases the
                 potential for an undesirable outcome. Poor radio communication skills, for
                 example, have caused runway incursions. To reduce this risk, pilots should
                 meet English language skill standards, understand and use correct
                 pilot/controller terminology, and use proper voice cadence when
                 communicating by radio. Lack of familiarity with airport markings can also
                 lead to runway incursions. Some GA pilots tend to ignore signage when the
                 pilot is familiar with an airport. Pilots who operate in the same environment
                 most of the time may find themselves at a new airport and lack familiarity
                 with signage. This places the pilot in a vulnerable position. GA pilots who
                 do not have much experience or recency with ATC or controlled airport
                 operations should work with a flight instructor to develop proficiency. These
                 examples illustrate the need for continuing education and training.
                 Familiarization with airport markings, airport operations, and ATC/pilot
                 terminology are also important areas that a flight instructor should consider
                 when conducting an IPC or flight review. Recurrent training, including
                 a flight to a towered airport with an experienced flight instructor, is a good
                 way to gain proficiency with airport operations and to develop the required
                 skills to avoid runway incursions.

      2.3.6.2    Step 2: Plan Each Flight. Planning is an essential step that GA pilots can
                 take to avoid pilot errors and runway incursions. Pilots should plan each flight
                 before it takes place, even when flying to a familiar airport. Preflight planning
                 enables the pilot to gain SA and make an informed go/no-go decision. Flight
                 planning should not merely include planning the route of flight; it should also
                 include a review of pertinent airport diagrams. Taking time during the
                 preflight planning process to review airport diagrams is essential.
                 For example, airport diagrams often include “hot spots.” The FAA defines
                 a hot spot as a location on an airport movement area with a history of potential
                 risk of collision or runway incursion. Many airports with a high incidence
                 of runway incursions have identified hot spots where incursions most
                 frequently occur. Pilots can avoid the common errors related to runway
                 incursions by being aware of each hot spot as it relates to the taxiways and
                 runways. Airport hot spots are only one of many considerations in preflight
                 planning. Circumstances change quickly. En route weather conditions
                 or airport movement area closures is vital information. To be prepared, pilots
                 need to review all information concerning the flight, including Notices
                 to Airmen (NOTAM). Pilots should always obtain a standard briefing and
                 review pertinent NOTAMs prior to each flight. Conducting preflight planning


                                               2-8

4/30/18                                                                                  AC 61-98D


                  prior to every flight places a pilot in a better position to avoid incidents,
                  accidents, and runway incursions.

      2.3.6.3     Step 3: Use Set Procedures. GA pilots should develop and adhere to set
                  cockpit procedures based on regulatory requirements and industry best
                  practices. Taking the step to develop and routinely use set procedures
                  complements mandatory actions and reduces the risks of human errors and
                  runway incursions. Pilots should also include the following items in their set
                  cockpit procedures:

      2.3.6.3.1   Passenger Briefing. GA pilots should always brief passengers prior to a flight
                  operation. Determining the necessary components for developing or validating
                  an effective passenger briefing begins in the planning stage of a flight.
                  The passenger briefing should contain the pilot’s instruction and procedures
                  for minimizing distractions in the cockpit. It should also include all the
                  pertinent elements prescribed by 14 CFR part 91, § 91.107(a)(1) and (2).
                  Many proprietary checklists include the passenger briefing.

      2.3.6.3.2   Checklist Usage. GA pilots should use an effective, aircraft-specific checklist
                  as a matter of routine throughout all phases of aircraft operations. Pilots
                  should complete all aircraft pretaxi checklist items prior to taxi.

      2.3.6.3.3   Navigation and Communications (NAV/COM) Setup. Communications and
                  navigation aids should be set up prior to taxi. Setting up radios and
                  navigational aids on the roll are distractions; this is the leading cause of
                  “heads down” in the cockpit. This in turn hinders the pilot’s ability to see and
                  avoid any conflicts while taxiing.

      2.3.6.3.4   Copying Clearances. Most pilots have, or should develop, a shorthand method
                  for copying an instrument flight rules (IFR) clearance. The same is true for
                  a taxi clearance. Pilots should develop a set method to copy any type of taxi
                  clearance. Pilots should write down and read back all clearances to ensure that
                  the pilot establishes and maintains effective communications. As with any
                  clearance, a readback for a taxi clearance is mandatory.

      2.3.6.3.5   Sterile Cockpit. A sterile cockpit is another procedural step that pilots should
                  take to reduce the risk of a runway incursion. A sterile cockpit means avoiding
                  all conversations and actions not related to flight during critical phases
                  of aircraft operations such as taxi, takeoff, and landings. A distraction-free
                  cockpit should always include proper taxi procedures and no extraneous
                  conversations or cell phone use.

      2.3.6.3.6   Taxi Procedure. GA pilots should use proper taxi procedures to reduce the risk
                  of an incident or accident. Maintaining an appropriate taxi speed is a crucial
                  element of an effective taxi procedure.


                                                2-9

4/30/18                                                                             AC 61-98D


      2.3.6.4   Step 4: Prevent Taxi Confusion. Pilots can take additional steps to reduce
                the risk of confusion during ground operations. Taxi confusion most
                commonly occurs when a pilot is taxiing at an unfamiliar airport.
                Low-visibility conditions increase the potential for confusion. Pilots have the
                option to request progressive taxi instructions when taxiing at a controlled
                airport. Progressive taxi instructions are an excellent mitigation strategy
                to ensure compliance with taxi clearances. This procedure is especially useful
                at unfamiliar controlled airports. Receiving progressive taxi instructions
                is an effective strategy to prevent runway incursions. Pilots should have
                access to the airport diagram when taxiing. Pilots may use the same diagram
                that they used during the preflight planning process. Airport diagrams are
                designed to assist in the movement of ground traffic at locations with complex
                runway/taxiway configurations. Runway confusion occurs when pilots
                confuse the identity of a runway. This is another example of an error that
                an effective set operating procedure can prevent. Setting the heading bug
                to the assigned runway heading, when a runway assignment is given, provides
                a method to ensure that the pilot identifies the correct runway. Familiarity
                with airport markings comes into play here, too. Reading all available signs
                and verifying them with the runway assignment should be part of a pilot’s set
                procedure. The critical part is to include these actions into the set procedure
                and use the procedure on every flight. A comprehensive and set taxi procedure
                will help to prevent an unwanted event such as a runway incursion.

      2.3.6.5   Step 5: Ensure Situational Awareness (SA). Ensuring SA is another step
                that begins with preflight planning. Some pilots only think of SA in terms
                of flight operations. Reframing SA to cover all phases of flight is one more
                step in reducing pilot errors. While maintaining SA is important in all
                circumstances, it is particularly important when operating at an airport without
                an operating control tower. To achieve SA, pilots should be fully aware
                of their intended taxi route and be able to follow the planned route correctly.
                To maintain SA, pilots should always adopt a heads-up attitude when taxiing.
                This industry best practice is also a step to reduce the risk of an inadvertent
                runway incursion.

      2.3.6.6   Step 6: Manage Aircraft Lights. Use of aircraft lights is an additional
                procedure that GA pilots often overlook. Exterior aircraft lights may be used
                to make an aircraft operating on the airport surface more conspicuous. Aircraft
                lights allow others to have some idea of the pilot’s intentions. Proper use
                of aircraft lights should be a defined element in every pilot’s set procedures.
                One example of how this might help prevent runway incursion is that airmen
                assume that an aircraft’s landing light will be on when it is ready to take off.
                If ATC issues a “line up and wait” (LUAW) clearance and the pilot
                mistakenly plans to take off, the tower may notice the landing lights on and
                call for confirmation so that a mishap is avoided.


                                            2-10

4/30/18                                                                                    AC 61-98D


2.3.7 The FAA Safety Team (FAASTeam). Because GA PDs comprise the greatest percent
      of all runway incursions, the FAA has increased its outreach efforts through its Flight
      Standards FAASTeam program. The FAASTeam program provides outreach to
      GA pilots on topics concerning aviation safety. For example, the FAASTeam addresses
      local runway safety issues by posting hot spot charts, runway safety bulletins, runway
      safety event notices, and other materials on its website, https://www.faasafety.gov/.
      Additionally, the FAASTeam also provides web-based training. Pilots and flight
      instructors should become familiar with all FAASTeam resources to learn more about
      runway incursions.

2.3.8 FAA Recommendations. GA runway incursions are too common. Sometimes they result
      in tragedy. Pilots and flight instructors need to 1) understand the root causes of runway
      incursions, 2) be aware of industry best practices to mitigate runway incursions, and
      3) integrate the steps described above into effective set procedures to avoid runway
      incursions. In addition, GA pilots should apply this information to their personal currency
      programs. Flight instructors should apply runway incursion avoidance strategies in their
      training and pilot evaluation plans of action. You can find additional runway incursion
      information and mitigation resources at https://www.faa.gov/airports/runway_safety/.

  2.4 Flight Instructor Responsibility and Safety Culture. The only contact that many pilots
      may have with an aviation authority is through their instructors. Flight instructors are
      professionals who play a vital role in ensuring aviation safety. Consequently, flight
      instructors are the cornerstone of aviation safety. They mentor pilot safety practices as
      they mitigate aviation accidents by providing pilot flight training and conducting pilot
      evaluations. In other words, flight instructors bear a responsibility to produce and sustain
      the safest pilots possible.

2.4.1 Mentoring Competency. A flight instructor’s actions influence the GA safety culture.
      The FAA expects all flight instructors to adhere to the highest training standards and
      safety practices. Flight instructors should be fully qualified in every role they perform.
      For example, and as discussed further in paragraph 4.2.5, the flight instructor should be
      qualified in each specific aircraft M/M in which they provide instruction. For this reason,
      flight instructors should consider their personal qualifications prior to accepting any
      instructional or pilot evaluation role. This is an important consideration for conducting
      a flight review, IPC, or specialized flight training, such as transition training in a specific
      TAA. If a flight instructor is not proficient in an aircraft or specialized field of
      instruction, the flight instructor should always be honest and decline to provide flight
      training or a pilot evaluation in an unfamiliar aircraft or role. As an alternative, the flight
      instructor should assist the pilot in finding an experienced flight instructor who
      is qualified to fill the flight instructor role in the specialized aircraft or field of interest.
      The FAA’s optional Best Practices for Mentoring in Flight Instruction provides
      additional tips for aviation mentors. You can find this publication at
      https://www.faa.gov/training_testing/training/media/mentoring_best_practices.pdf.


                                                 2-11

4/30/18                                                                               AC 61-98D


2.4.2 FAA/Industry Safety Recommendations. Flight instructors are required to be
      knowledgeable and up-to-date on issues critical to aviation safety. Government/industry
      safety recommendations help flight instructors meet this responsibility. GAJSC findings
      and recommendations, NTSB safety reports, and the Aircraft Owners and Pilots
      Association’s (AOPA) Air Safety Institute’s Joseph T. Nall Reports all provide critical
      safety information. Flight instructors should incorporate this information into the training
      they provide. Utilizing and disseminating this critical information when promoting
      personal currency programs, providing effective flight reviews, and conducting IPCs
      helps to build a positive safety culture that can reduce GA accidents.


                                              2-12

4/30/18                                                                                AC 61-98D


                     CHAPTER 3. RECENT FLIGHT EXPERIENCE

 3.1 Recent General Experience. Title 14 CFR Part 61, § 61.57(a), General Experience,
     and (b), Night Takeoff and Landing Experience, specify the minimum requirements for
     recent flight experience, specifically takeoffs and landings, in each category and class
     of aircraft in order to act as pilot in command (PIC) of an aircraft carrying passengers.

3.1.1 Requirements Specified in § 61.57(a) and (b). Pilots should regard these requirements
      as minimums that should be modified to address factors such as overall pilot experience,
      different operating environments, complexity of the facilities used, and variations
      in makes and models (M/M) of aircraft within specific categories and classes.
      For example, a pilot may meet recent flight experience in a given M/M of aircraft but
      may have operated only in light or moderate wind conditions at airports with long
      runways. The pilot should consider acquiring additional takeoff and landing experience
      in stronger wind conditions or at airports with short runways before acting as PIC
      of an aircraft carrying passengers in similar conditions. Under some circumstances, the
      change in the customary operating environment may be great enough that the pilot should
      seek flight instruction before attempting solo operations.

3.1.2 Night Currency Requirements. Night currency requirements deserve additional
      consideration. The night experience of most pilots represents only a small portion of their
      total flight time. The impact of marginal weather conditions on night operations
      is so significant that pilots should evaluate their own need for both increased proficiency
      and additional planning when contemplating flights under marginal conditions at night.

3.1.3 Obtaining Currency for Each Make and Model (M/M). Special considerations apply
      when pilots operate aircraft M/Ms they do not customarily fly. Analysis of accident data
      has shown that accident rates increase for pilots with little or no time in aircraft type
      flown. Section 61.31 specifies additional requirements that apply to operating aircraft
      (e.g., tailwheel, complex, high-performance, turbine, or large aircraft) that may require
      a type rating, specific training endorsement, authorization, and/or additional experience
      requirements for that aircraft or operation. For non-high-performance small aircraft, the
      basic currency requirements of § 61.57(a) and (b) apply only to category and class.
      For example, a pilot who meets the requirements in a Cessna 152 would also meet the
      requirements in a Cessna 172. However, the FAA recommends that pilots attain currency
      in each separate M/M before conducting passenger-carrying operations. This currency
      should include familiarity with the pilot’s operating handbook (POH), the Airplane Flight
      Manual (AFM), and/or any other available information on that aircraft. The FAA
      recommends that all pilots obtain a comprehensive checkout in each M/M aircraft from
      an appropriately rated flight instructor. Airmen are encouraged to search for aircraft
      “clubs” for information and familiarization on specific M/Ms. AC 90-109, Transition
      to Unfamiliar Aircraft, provides additional information and guidance pertaining
      to transition to experimental and/or unfamiliar airplanes.

       Note: Considerations regarding basic currency apply not only to single-engine
       land airplanes but to other categories and classes of aircraft, including multiengine
       aircraft, seaplanes, gliders, helicopters, gyroplanes, and free balloons.


                                               3-1

4/30/18                                                                             AC 61-98D


 3.2 Recent Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) Experience. When conducted in accordance
     with § 61.57(c) and as qualified and approved by the Administrator, pilots may perform
     the six required approaches, holding procedures and tasks, and intercepting and tracking
     courses through the use of navigational electronic systems (all aircraft except gliders) in
     an FAA-qualified full flight simulator (FFS) or flight training device (FTD).
     Furthermore, this instrument experience must be accomplished in a program approved by
     the Administrator (§ 61.4). An FAA-approved Aviation Training Device (ATD) may be
     used (refer to AC 61-136, FAA Approval of Aviation Training Devices and Their Use for
     Training and Experience) to accomplish instrument currency as specified in the FAA
     letter of authorization (LOA) provided for each ATD model.


                                             3-2

4/30/18                                                                                AC 61-98D


                              CHAPTER 4. FLIGHT REVIEW

 4.1 Intent and Structure of the Flight Review.

4.1.1 Intent of Flight Review. The purpose of the flight review required by 14 CFR part 61,
      § 61.56 is to provide for a regular evaluation of pilot skills and aeronautical knowledge.
      Consequently, a flight review is a routine evaluation of a pilot’s ability to conduct safe
      flight. In effect, it is a proficiency-based exercise in which the airman is required to
      demonstrate the safe exercise of the privileges of his or her pilot certificate. The flight
      instructor should be aware that the flight review is not a test or checkride, but rather
      a training event in which proficiency is evaluated. Section 61.56 states that the review
      must consist of a minimum of 1 hour of ground training and a minimum of 1 hour of
      flight training, except as provided for in § 61.56(b), (d), and (e). However, all flight
      instructors should fully understand that § 61.56(a)(2) requires the instructor to conduct
      “a review of those maneuvers and procedures that, at the discretion of the person giving
      the review, are necessary for the pilot to demonstrate the safe exercise of the privileges of
      the pilot certificate.” If the pilot does not demonstrate the proficiency to conduct safe
      flight, then more training is required. For this reason, the FAA reminds flight instructors
      that a flight review may require more than 1 hour of ground training and 1 hour of flight
      training. Since satisfactory completion of a flight review is based on pilot proficiency, it
      is up to the instructional service provider to determine what type of instruction is required
      and how much additional training time, if any, is required to ensure that the pilot has the
      necessary knowledge and skills to conduct safe flight operations. While flight instructors
      are encouraged to manage the expectations of the pilot under review and discuss the
      outline of the flight review with the pilot, it is the flight instructor that ultimately
      determines the total training time required for a flight review.

4.1.2 Structure of Flight Review. For the reasons previously discussed, a flight instructor
      should not develop a flight review plan of action based on regulatory minimums. Instead,
      a flight instructor should develop a plan based on achieving a flight proficiency and
      knowledge level that meets regulatory requirements. Section 61.56 states that a flight
      review must include a review of the current general operating and flight rules of 14 CFR
      part 91. It also states that a person conducting the review has the discretion to determine
      the maneuvers and procedures necessary for the pilot under review to demonstrate “safe
      exercise of the privileges of the pilot certificate.” With the increasing complexity of the
      aviation operating environment, flight instructors are encouraged to structure the flight
      review and develop a plan of action that is specific to the needs of the pilot under review.
      The FAA has provided the following recommended guidance in this section to help flight
      instructors develop a plan of action for an effective flight review.

       Note: The Private Pilot Airman Certification Standards (ACS) (FAA-S-ACS-6)
       and the Commercial Pilot ACS (FAA-S-ACS-7) have replaced the corresponding
       practical test standards (PTS) for airplane applicants. Applicants in other
       categories should continue to use the current version of the appropriate PTS.
       Instructors should always check the FAA website’s Airman Testing page to
       ensure use of the most current versions of the ACS/PTS at
       https://www.faa.gov/training_testing/testing/.


                                               4-1

4/30/18                                                                                    AC 61-98D


      4.1.2.1     Accomplishing a Flight Review. Under § 61.56(c) no person may act as pilot
                  in command (PIC) of an aircraft, except as provided in § 61.56(d), (e),
                  and (g), unless within the preceding 24 calendar-months that person has
                  accomplished a satisfactory flight review in an aircraft for which that pilot
                  is appropriately rated. An authorized instructor or other person approved
                  by the Administrator must conduct the flight review.

      4.1.2.2     Completing the FAA Pilot Proficiency Program (WINGS) (One or More
                  Phases). Under § 61.56(e), a person who has satisfactorily completed one
                  or more phases of the FAA-sponsored WINGS within the preceding
                  24 calendar-months does not need to accomplish the flight review
                  requirements of this section. AC 61-91, WINGS—Pilot Proficiency Program,
                  describes how flight instructors should encourage pilots to participate in
                  WINGS.

      4.1.2.3     Completing Proficiency Checks and Ratings.

      4.1.2.3.1   Pilots and flight instructors should be aware that, under § 61.56(d), there
                  is no requirement for pilots who have completed certain proficiency checks
                  and ratings within the preceding 24 calendar-months to accomplish a separate
                  flight review. These accomplishments include satisfactory completion of pilot
                  proficiency checks conducted by the FAA, an approved pilot check airman,
                  a Designated Pilot Examiner (DPE), or one of the U.S. Armed Forces for
                  a pilot certificate, rating, or operating privilege.

                  Note: Effective November 15, 2013, a change to § 61.56(d) permits
                  an airman who passes a practical test for issuance of a flight instructor
                  certificate, a practical test for the addition of a rating to a flight
                  instructor certificate, a practical test for renewal of a flight instructor
                  certificate, or a practical test for the reinstatement of a flight instructor
                  certificate, to meet the 24-calendar-month flight review requirements.
                  Refer to Federal Register (FR) Docket No. FAA-2013-0780,
                  Amdt. No. 61-131 at https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2013-09-
                  16/pdf/2013-22485.pdf.

      4.1.2.3.2   However, the FAA recommends that pilots consider also accomplishing
                  a review under some of the following circumstances. For example, a pilot with
                  an Airplane Single-Engine Land (ASEL) rating may have recently obtained
                  a glider rating, but may still wish to consider obtaining a flight review
                  in a single-engine airplane if the appropriate 24-calendar-month period has
                  nearly expired. When approached by pilots seeking advice on such matters,
                  flight instructors should consider the factors described in the following
                  paragraphs.


                                                 4-2

4/30/18                                                                                AC 61-98D


 4.2 Pre-Review Considerations. Before undertaking the review, the flight instructor should
     interview the pilot to determine the nature of his or her flying and operating
     requirements. Elements to consider should include, but not be limited to, the following
     areas:

4.2.1 Type of Equipment Flown.

       4.2.1.1    Section 61.56(c)(1) states that to act as a PIC, a pilot must accomplish a flight
                  review in an aircraft for which that pilot is rated. A pilot might hold multiple
                  ratings. In such cases, the pilot may take a flight review in any one of the
                  aircraft for which he or she holds a rating or operating privilege, and he or she
                  will have met the regulatory requirement for all aircraft for which he or she
                  holds a certificate and/or rating. For example, a pilot who holds a private pilot
                  certificate with an ASEL rating and a commercial balloon certificate may take
                  a flight review in either aircraft and will have met the requirements of the rule
                  for both. However, a pilot may not take a flight review in an aircraft for which
                  he or she does not hold a rating or operating privilege. For example, that same
                  ASEL-rated pilot may not take a flight review in a Multiengine Land (MEL)
                  airplane if he or she does not hold an MEL airplane rating. A pilot who holds
                  only a sport pilot certificate may only take a flight review in a light-sport
                  aircraft for which he or she holds an operational privilege. For example,
                  a sport pilot who holds airplane privileges could not take the flight review
                  in a Cessna 172, because that airplane is not a light-sport airplane and
                  he or she does not hold operating privileges for that airplane.

       4.2.1.2    The reviewed maneuvers and procedures will vary depending on the category,
                  class, and make and model (M/M) of the aircraft used. For example, a review
                  in a light multiengine aircraft will be different from one conducted in a small,
                  two-seat tailwheel aircraft that utilizes limited instrumentation. The flight
                  instructor may wish to recommend that the pilot complete the review in the
                  aircraft most commonly flown, or in a more complex M/M if he or she
                  regularly flies several aircraft. The flight instructor may also wish to
                  recommend that the pilot take a review in more than one category/class of
                  aircraft under certain circumstances. For example, a pilot with ASEL and
                  glider ratings may have flown only gliders in the last 2 years but is also
                  contemplating flying single-engine airplanes in the near future. If a pilot who
                  requests a review only in the glider approaches a flight instructor, the flight
                  instructor may wish to recommend an additional review by a qualified person
                  in a single-engine airplane before the pilot acts as PIC of a single-engine
                  airplane.

4.2.2 Nature of Flight Operations. The flight instructor should consider the type of flying
      usually done by the pilot before establishing a plan of action for conducting the review.
      For example, a pilot conducting long-distance flights between busy terminal areas may
      need a different review than a pilot who usually flies in the local area from the same
      airport. The flight instructor should consider the need for an indepth review of certain
      subjects or procedures if the type of flight operations is likely to change, or if other


                                               4-3

4/30/18                                                                                  AC 61-98D


       extenuating circumstances exist. For example, a pilot who normally conducts only local
       flight operations may plan to begin flying to a location with Class B Airspace. Another
       pilot may only operate a two-seat aircraft without radio but will operate in close
       proximity to Class B Airspace. In both cases, the flight instructor should include Class B
       Airspace operating requirements and procedures in the flight review. This review should
       also include pertinent revisions to operational regulations to ensure that the pilot has full
       knowledge of these changes.

4.2.3 Amount and Recency of Flight Experience. The flight instructor should review the pilot’s
      logbook to determine total flight time, time in type, and recency of experience in order to
      evaluate the need for particular maneuvers and procedures in the review. For example,
      a pilot who has not flown in several years may require an extensive review of basic
      maneuvers from the PTS or ACS appropriate to that pilot’s certificate level. The same
      pilot may also require a more extensive review of part 91, including changes in airspace
      and other requirements. Another pilot who is transitioning to a newer, faster, or
      technically advanced aircraft (TAA) should receive more emphasis on knowledge of
      aircraft systems and performance, or in cross-country procedures appropriate to a faster
      airplane. Regardless of flight experience, the flight instructor should ensure that the
      review plan of action includes all areas in which he or she determines the pilot should
      receive training in order to operate safely. In some cases, the flight instructor may wish to
      recommend that the pilot accomplish a complete refresher program.

4.2.4 Agreement on the Conduct of the Review. After completing the above analysis, the flight
      instructor should review these considerations with the pilot and reach an understanding
      regarding how he or she will conduct the review. The flight instructor should also review
      the criteria for satisfactory completion of the review with the pilot. The flight instructor
      may wish to provide the pilot with reading materials or recommend publications for study
      before actually undertaking the flight review. For example, the FAA Safety Team
      (FAASTeam) provides many free online “Wings Courses for Pilots,” which includes
      a free online flight review preparation course, ALC-25, Flight Review Prep Guide.
      You can find this course at https://www.faasafety.gov/gslac/ALC/course_catalog.aspx.

4.2.5 Instructor Qualifications. Instructors should also consider their own experience and
      qualifications in a given M/M aircraft prior to giving a review in that model. The flight
      instructor conducting a flight review must hold a category, class, and (if appropriate) type
      rating on his or her pilot certificate. Also, the instructor must have a category and class
      rating on his or her flight instructor certificate or a sport instructor privilege in his or her
      logbook appropriate to the aircraft in which he or she conducts the review. To conduct
      a flight review in a multiengine airplane, the instructor must hold an airplane multiengine
      rating on his or her pilot and flight instructor certificate. For aircraft in which the flight
      instructor is not current or with which he or she is not familiar, he or she should obtain
      recent flight experience or sufficient knowledge of aircraft limitations, characteristics,
      and performance before conducting the review. In any case, the flight instructor must
      observe the rating limitations of § 61.195.


                                                 4-4

4/30/18                                                                               AC 61-98D


 4.3 Planning and Recording the Review. In addition to considering the information in this
     chapter and Appendices D through F of this AC, a flight instructor may elect to use the
     FAA’s online guidance, Conducting an Effective Flight Review, available at
     https://www.faa.gov/pilots/training to prepare, conduct, and document the flight review.
     After reaching an agreement on how the flight instructor will conduct the review, he or
     she should prepare a plan of action for completing the review. The plan of action should
     include a list of regulatory subjects that the flight instructor will cover, the maneuvers
     and procedures that the pilot will need to accomplish, the anticipated sequence in which
     the segments will occur, and the location where the flight instructor will perform the
     review. You can find a suggested flight review plan of action format in Appendix D.
     Although not required by § 61.189, the flight instructor may wish to retain this plan of
     action (job aid) for an appropriate period as a record of the scope and content of the flight
     review. Additionally, the flight instructor may wish to submit an FAA Form 8710-1,
     Airman Certificate and/or Rating Application, to AFB-720. When submitted, AFB-720
     will add the application to the pilot’s record (see paragraph 1.10.2).

4.3.1 Review of Part 91 Operating and Flight Rules. The flight instructor should tailor the
      review of general operating and flight rules to the needs of the pilot under review.
      The objective is to ensure that the pilot can comply with all regulatory requirements and
      operate safely in various types of airspace under an appropriate range of weather
      conditions. As a result, the flight instructor should conduct a review that is broad enough
      to meet this objective, yet provide a more comprehensive review in those areas in which
      the pilot’s knowledge is weaker. In the latter instance, the flight instructor may wish to
      employ a variety of references/sources, such as the Aeronautical Information Manual
      (AIM), to ensure that the pilot’s knowledge meets current standards.

4.3.2 Pilot Deviations (PD). The occurrence of incidents and PDs has emphasized the need
      to ensure that all pilots receive adequate briefing on PD avoidance awareness. PDs are
      broadly categorized as airborne or ground. Airborne PDs include altitude and heading
      deviations and airspace violations. Ground PDs include runway incursions and any other
      unauthorized operation in the movement areas of an airport (see paragraph 2.3 for more
      information). Pilots should be familiar with all types of airspace, ground operating
      procedures, and best practices to avoid potential PDs. The flight review may be the only
      regular proficiency and recurrency training experienced by some pilots. Therefore, flight
      instructors should place appropriate emphasis on this part of the review.

4.3.3 Automation Competency. Occurrences of incidents and accidents due to a pilot’s lack
      of proficiency with aircraft automation have emphasized the need to ensure that all pilots
      are fully competent with the automated systems equipped in the aircraft flown.
      Automation competency is the pilot’s ability to understand and operate a given aircraft’s
      automated systems. The flight instructor should consider the type of automation the pilot
      regularly uses before establishing the plan of action for conducting his or her flight
      review. When conducting the check in an aircraft with automation, the instructor should
      evaluate the pilot’s automation competency. Pilots transitioning to TAA should receive
      specialized transition training from a qualified flight instructor with experience with the
      specific equipment used.


                                               4-5

4/30/18                                                                                  AC 61-98D


4.3.4 Angle of Attack (AOA) Systems. The FAA, along with the General Aviation Joint
      Steering Committee (GAJSC), is promoting AOA systems as one of the many safety
      initiatives aimed at reducing the General Aviation (GA) accident rate. AOA indicators
      will specifically target loss of control (LOC) accidents. LOC is the number one root
      cause of fatalities in GA. More than 25 percent of GA fatal accidents occur during the
      maneuvering phase of flight. Of those accidents, half involve stall/spin scenarios.
      Technology such as AOA indicators can have a tremendous impact on reversing this
      trend and are increasingly affordable for GA airplanes. During the flight review, if the
      airplane is equipped with an AOA indicator, the flight instructor should evaluate its use
      and correct interpretation of cues gained by referencing the AOA indicator by the pilot
      receiving the flight review. If the airplane is not equipped with an AOA indicator, the
      flight instructor should emphasize the importance of this item and evaluate the pilot’s
      general knowledge of aerodynamic principles relating to AOA.

4.3.5 Review of Maneuvers and Procedures.

       4.3.5.1    The maneuvers and procedures covered during the review are those that,
                  in the opinion of the flight instructor conducting the review, are necessary for
                  the pilot to perform to demonstrate that he or she can safely exercise the
                  privileges of his or her pilot certificate. Accordingly, the flight instructor
                  should evaluate the pilot’s skills and knowledge to the extent necessary to
                  ensure that he or she can safely operate within regulatory requirements
                  throughout a wide range of conditions. The flight instructor should always
                  include abnormal and emergency procedures applicable to the aircraft flown
                  in the flight review. For a satisfactory flight review, the pilot should be able to
                  perform all maneuvers in accordance with the ACS or PTS, as applicable, for
                  the pilot certificate that he or she holds. Therefore, the FAA encourages the
                  use of ACS/PTS during flight reviews.

       4.3.5.2    The flight instructor may wish to prepare a preliminary plan of action for the
                  flight review based on an interview or other assessment of the pilot’s
                  qualifications and skills. See Appendix D for suggested interview questions.
                  Appendix D provides a sample flight instructor flight review checklist.
                  The flight instructor should outline a sequence of maneuvers to the pilot
                  taking the review. For example, this may include a cross-country flight to
                  another airport with maneuvers accomplished while en route. It could also
                  include a period of simulated instrument flight time. The flight instructor
                  should request that the pilot conduct whatever preflight preparation is
                  necessary to complete the planned flight. This preparation should include all
                  items required in part 91, § 91.103, such as checking weather, calculating
                  required runway lengths, calculating Weight and Balance (W&B), completing
                  a flight log, filing a flight plan, and conducting the preflight inspection.

       4.3.5.3    Before beginning the flight portion of the review, the flight instructor should
                  discuss various operational areas with the pilot. This oral review should
                  include, but not be limited to, areas such as aircraft systems, speeds,
                  performance, meteorological and other hazards (e.g., wind shear and wake


                                                4-6

4/30/18                                                                                   AC 61-98D


                 turbulence), operations in controlled airspace, and abnormal and emergency
                 procedures. The emphasis during this discussion should be on practical
                 knowledge of recommended procedures and regulatory requirements.

      4.3.5.4    Regardless of the pilot’s experience, the flight instructor should review at least
                 those maneuvers considered critical to safe flight, such as:

                 •   Takeoffs;
                 •   Stabilized approaches to landings;
                 •   Slow flight;
                 •   Stall recognition, stalls, and stall recovery;
                 •   Spin recognition and avoidance;
                 •   Recovery from unusual attitudes; and
                 •   Operating the aircraft by sole reference to instruments under actual
                     or simulated conditions.

      4.3.5.5    Based on his or her in-flight assessment of the pilot’s skills, the flight
                 instructor may wish to add other maneuvers from the PTS/ACS appropriate to
                 the pilot’s grade of certificate. Appendix D includes a recommended job aid
                 (flight review checklist), including a list of suggested maneuvers. The FAA
                 does not intend this list to be all-inclusive, nor does it limit a flight instructor’s
                 discretion in selecting other appropriate maneuvers and procedures. To the
                 greatest possible extent, the flight instructor should organize and sequence the
                 selected maneuvers in a realistic scenario appropriate to the kind of flying
                 normally done by the pilot.

      4.3.5.6    The role of the flight instructor during the review is to provide an evaluation.
                 However, the instructor is not limited to this role and may provide specific
                 instruction to an airman on any areas the instructor notes as being weak. This
                 additional instruction does not preclude the pilot’s successful completion of
                 the review as long as the deficiencies are corrected. If the additional
                 instruction does not correct the deficiencies, and/or it becomes apparent to the
                 instructor that additional flights will be necessary, the flight instructor should
                 discuss the situation with the pilot and proceed accordingly.

 4.4 Postreview Considerations. Upon completion of the review, the flight instructor should
     complete the summary and evaluation portion of the flight review checklist (if used) and
     debrief the pilot. Whether or not the review was satisfactory, the flight instructor should
     provide the pilot with a comprehensive analysis of his or her performance, including
     suggestions for improving any weak areas. FAA-H-8083-9, Aviation Instructor’s
     Handbook, chapter 5, provides specific suggestions for conducting the postflight
     evaluation discussion as a “collaborative critique.”


                                               4-7

4/30/18                                                                                 AC 61-98D


4.4.1 Unsatisfactory Completion of the Review. The FAA does not intend the flight review
      to be a checkride. If the review is not satisfactory, the flight instructor should log the
      flight as “dual instruction given” and not as a “failure.” If the pilot does not perform well
      enough for the flight instructor to endorse him or her for satisfactory completion of the
      flight review, the instructor should use the applicable ACS or PTS as the objective
      standard to discuss areas needing improvement, as well as areas where the pilot
      performed well. In this case, the flight instructor should offer a practical course of
      action—ground training, flight training, or both—to help the pilot under review to return
      to proficiency standards. The flight instructor should then recommend additional training
      in the areas of the review that were unsatisfactory. A pilot who does not receive an
      endorsement for a satisfactory flight review may continue to exercise the privileges of his
      or her certificate, provided that a period of 24 calendar-months has not elapsed since the
      pilot completed at least one of the requirements that satisfies the flight review event as
      specified in § 61.56. However, a pilot may not act as PIC of an aircraft if that pilot’s
      flight review has elapsed.

4.4.2 Satisfactory Completion of the Review. When the applicant has successfully completed
      the review, the flight instructor should endorse the pilot’s logbook to certify that the pilot
      has satisfactorily accomplished the flight review. The flight instructor should make the
      endorsement for a satisfactory review in accordance with AC 61-65, Certification: Pilots
      and Flight and Ground Instructors. The flight and ground time must also be logged in the
      pilot’s logbook in accordance with § 61.51(a)(1).


                                                4-8

4/30/18                                                                                  AC 61-98D


                  CHAPTER 5. INSTRUMENT PROFICIENCY CHECK

 5.1 Structuring an Instrument Proficiency Check (IPC). Title 14 CFR part 61, § 61.57(d)
     outlines the requirements for an IPC. This chapter provides guidance on the conduct of e
     IPC. In addition, flight instructors may wish to use the FAA’s optional online guidance
     document, available at https://www.faa.gov/pilots/training/ (“Instrument Proficiency
     Check (IPC) Guidance”), to structure, conduct, and document the IPC. Appendix J
     provides an optional IPC checklist as an instructor job aid resource for conducting
     an IPC. FAA Instrument Rating Practical Test Standards (PTS) or Instrument Rating—
     Airplane Airman Certification Standards (ACS), as applicable, outline the required
     maneuvers conducted in an IPC (see paragraph 5.3).

       Note: The Instrument Rating Airplane ACS (FAA-S-ACS-8) has replaced
       Instrument Rating—Airplane, Helicopter, and Powered Lift PTS
       (FAA-S-8081-4E) for airplane applicants. Helicopter and powered-lift applicants
       should continue to use FAA-S-8081-4E. Instructors should always check the FAA
       website’s Airman Testing page to ensure use of the most current versions of the
       ACS/PTS at https://www.faa.gov/training_testing/testing/.

5.1.1 Instructor Requirements to Conduct an IPC. The flight instructor must hold an instrument
      rating on his or her pilot certificate and flight instructor certificate that is appropriate to
      the category and class of aircraft used for the IPC. For example, an IPC conducted
      in a multiengine airplane requires a flight instructor who holds both multiengine and
      instrument ratings on his or her pilot and flight instructor certificate. The basis for flight
      instructor privileges and limitations is found in §§ 61.193 and 61.195. The flight
      instructor should also meet currency requirements for his or her pilot and flight instructor
      certificate.

       Note: In addition to having the appropriate instructor ratings, the flight instructor
       should consider other factors relating to his or her ability to conduct an IPC.
       These include the factors discussed for the flight review, as well as the
       instructor’s own instrument currency.

5.1.2 Conducting an IPC. A flight instructor may conduct all or part (as specified in
      FAA-S-ACS-8 (Airplanes Only) or FAA-S-8081-4, Instrument Rating Practical Test
      Standards for Helicopter and Powered Lift) of the IPC in an FAA-approved full flight
      simulator (FFS), flight training device (FTD), or Aviation Training Device (ATD) as
      appropriate. If the IPC is accomplished in an FFS or FTD qualified under 14 CFR
      part 60, that IPC checking program must receive approval by the FAA Administrator
      (§ 61.4). Guidance on what IPC instrument tasks can be accomplished in an FFS, FTD, or
      ATD is located in the current instrument PTS or ACS, as appropriate.

       Note: Advanced aviation training devices (AATD) and basic aviation training
       devices (BATD) collectively make up the two categories of FAA-approved
       ATDs. Only AATDs may be used for the IPC. The flight instructor should review
       the ATD letter of authorization (LOA) for the specific credit allowances provided
       for that training device model.


                                                5-1

4/30/18                                                                                AC 61-98D


5.1.3 Precheck Considerations. The flight instructor should structure an IPC in a manner
      similar to that of the flight review, tailoring the check to the needs of the pilot.

       5.1.3.1    The flight instructor and pilot should discuss the operating conditions under
                  which the flight instructor will conduct the check. If the flight instructor
                  conducts the check in an aircraft, the check may be under visual flight rules
                  (VFR) or instrument flight rules (IFR) in simulated instrument conditions, or
                  it may be under IFR in actual instrument conditions. If the flight instructor
                  conducts the check under IFR, or while under VFR conditions simulating
                  instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) with a view-limiting device, it is
                  the flight instructor’s responsibility to constantly remain vigilant to other
                  aircraft throughout all phases of the flight.

       5.1.3.2    The Pilot’s Instrument Experience Summary in Appendix G is available
                  to help the flight instructor structure an appropriate ground review for the IPC.
                  A table in FAA-S-8081-4 lists the maneuvers required for successful
                  completion of the IPC.

       5.1.3.3    As with the flight review, the flight instructor should develop a plan of action
                  that uses realistic scenarios to organize and sequence the required tasks and
                  maneuvers. Appendix H contains a sample plan of action for conducting the
                  proficiency check. The flight instructor should also discuss crewmember roles
                  and responsibilities with the pilot.

5.1.4 Agreement on the Conduct of the IPC. After completing the above analysis, the flight
      instructor should review these considerations with the pilot and reach an understanding
      regarding how he or she will conduct the IPC. The flight instructor should also review the
      criteria for satisfactory completion with the pilot under review. The flight instructor may
      wish to provide the pilot with reading materials or recommend publications for study
      before actually undertaking the IPC. For example, the FAA Safety Team (FAASTeam)
      provides many free online “Wings Courses for Pilots,” which includes a free online IPC
      preparation course, ALC-38, Instrument Proficiency Check Review Guide. You can find
      this course at https://www.faasafety.gov/gslac/ALC/course_catalog.aspx.

 5.2 IPC Knowledge Portion.

5.2.1 Determining the Pilot’s IFR Knowledge. The flight instructor determines whether the
      pilot has adequate knowledge and understanding of 14 CFR part 91, especially
      Subpart B, Flight Rules; Subpart C, Equipment, Instrument, and Certificate
      Requirements; and Subpart E, Maintenance, Preventive Maintenance, and Alterations.
      Additionally, the flight instructor determines that the pilot has adequate knowledge and
      understanding of the following areas:

       1. Instrument en route and approach chart interpretation, including Standard
          Instrument Departures (SID), Obstacle Departure Procedures (ODP), Standard
          Terminal Arrival Routes (STAR), and Area Navigation (RNAV)/Global


                                               5-2

4/30/18                                                                                 AC 61-98D


           Positioning System (GPS)/wide area augmentation system (WAAS)
           procedures.
       2. Obtaining and analyzing weather information, including knowledge
          of hazardous weather phenomena, such as icing and convective activity.
       3. Preflight planning, including aircraft performance, Notices to Airmen
          (NOTAM) information (including temporary flight restrictions (TFR)), fuel
          requirements, alternate requirements, and use of appropriate FAA publications
          such as the Airport/Facility Directory (A/FD).
       4. Aircraft systems related to IFR operations, including appropriate operating
          methods, limitations, and emergency procedures due to equipment failure.
       5. Aircraft flight instruments and navigation equipment, including
          characteristics, limitations, operating techniques, and emergency procedures
          due to malfunction or failure, such as lost communications and automation
          failure procedures.
       6. Determining the airworthiness of the aircraft for instrument flight, including
          required inspections and documents.
       7. Air traffic control (ATC) procedures pertinent to flight under IFR, with
          emphasis on elements of ATC clearances and pilot/controller responsibilities.
       8. A general working knowledge of aerodynamic principles relating to angle
          of attack (AOA) and the purpose, operation, and limitations of AOA
          indicators (if installed).

5.2.2 Evaluation of the Pilot’s Instrument Flight Proficiency. Following the discussion of the
      above subjects, the flight instructor should ask the pilot to prepare for the skill portion of
      the IPC by completing the necessary flight planning, obtaining current weather data,
      filing a flight plan, and conducting the preflight inspection. In order to fully evaluate the
      pilot’s skills under normal operating conditions, the flight instructor may wish to have the
      pilot conduct a short IFR cross-country flight with at least part of the flight conducted
      “in the system” under IFR.

 5.3 IPC Skill Portion. The maneuvers and procedures selected for the IPC must include
     those listed in the Rating Task Table in FAA-S-ACS-8 or FAA-S-8081-4, as applicable.
     The flight instructor conducting the IPC has the discretion to require any other
     maneuver(s) necessary to determine that the pilot can safely operate under IFR in a broad
     range of conditions appropriate to the aircraft flown and the ATC environment selected.
     The flight instructor should emphasize proper adherence to ATC clearances. Regardless
     of the maneuvers and procedures selected, the flight instructor should ensure that the pilot
     demonstrates satisfactory basic attitude instrument flying skills. For checks conducted in
     an airplane but not under actual instrument weather conditions, the flight instructor
     should employ an appropriate view-limiting device to simulate instrument conditions.
     As an aid to the flight instructor, Appendix J contains a sample flight instructor IPC
     checklist for conducting the IPC.


                                                5-3

4/30/18                                                                                AC 61-98D


 5.4 Post-IPC Considerations and Recordkeeping. Upon completion of the proficiency
     check, the flight instructor may wish to complete the summary and evaluation portion of
     the checklist and debrief the pilot on the results of the check. Regardless of the
     determination, the flight instructor should provide the pilot with a comprehensive
     analysis of his or her performance, including suggestions for improving any weak areas.
     Chapter 5 of the Aviation Instructor’s Handbook (FAA-H-8083-9) provides specific
     suggestions for conducting the postflight evaluation discussion as a “collaborative
     critique.”

5.4.1 Unsatisfactory Performance. As with the flight review, the flight instructor should not
      endorse the pilot’s logbook to reflect an unsatisfactory IPC. Rather, the flight instructor
      should log the session as “dual instruction given.”

5.4.2 Satisfactory Performance. The endorsement for a satisfactory proficiency check should
      be in accordance with AC 61-65, Certification: Pilots and Flight and Ground Instructors.
      You can find a suggested IPC plan of action format in Appendix J. Although not required
      by § 61.189, the flight instructor may wish to retain this plan of action (job aid) for an
      appropriate period as a record of the scope and content of the IPC. Additionally, the flight
      instructor may wish to submit an FAA Form 8710-1, Airman Certificate and/or Rating
      Application, to AFB-720. When submitted, AFB-720 will add the application to the
      pilot’s record (see paragraph 1.10.2).


                                               5-4

4/30/18                                                                               AC 61-98D
                                                                                      Appendix A
                                 APPENDIX A. RESOURCES

 A.1 FAA Documents (current editions).

      1. Advisory Circulars (AC): http://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/
         advisory_circulars/:
            •   AC 60-28, FAA English Language Standard for an FAA Certificate Issued Under
                14 CFR Parts 61, 63, 65, and 107.
            •   AC 61-65, Certification: Pilots and Flight and Ground Instructors.
            •   AC 61-89, Pilot Certificates: Aircraft Type Ratings.
            •   AC 61-91, WINGS—Pilot Proficiency Program.
            •   AC 61-136, FAA Approval of Aviation Training Devices and Their Use for
                Training and Experience.
            •   AC 90-109, Transition to Unfamiliar Aircraft (provides additional information and
                guidance pertaining to transition to experimental or unfamiliar aircraft).
            •   AC 91-73, Parts 91 and 135 Single Pilot, Flight School Procedures During Taxi
                Operations.
          2. Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM):
              https://www.faa.gov/air_traffic/publications/media/aim_basic_chg_1_dtd_3-
              29-18.pdf.
      3. Airman Certification Standards (ACS): http://www.faa.gov/training_testing/
         testing/acs/.
      4. Airman Testing: https://www.faa.gov/training_testing/testing/.
      5. Best Practices for Mentoring in Flight Instruction:
         https://www.faa.gov/training_testing/training/media/mentoring_best_
         practices.pdf.
      6. Conducting an Effective Flight Review:
         http://www.faa.gov/pilots/training/media/flight_review.pdf.
      7. FAA/Industry Training Standards (FITS) Personal and Weather Risk
         Assessment Guide: http://www.faa.gov/training_testing/training/fits/guidance.
      8. FAA Safety Briefing, January/February 2018:
         https://www.faa.gov/news/safety_briefing/2018/media/JanFeb2018.pdf.
      9. FAA Safety Briefing Archive:
         https://www.faa.gov/news/safety_briefing/archive/.
      10. General Aviation (GA) Safety Enhancement (SE) Topic Fact Sheets:
          https://www.faa.gov/news/safety_briefing/topic_archive/.
      11. Good N.I.G.H.T, FAA Safety Briefing, November/December 2015:
          https://www.faa.gov/news/safety_briefing/2015/media/NovDec2015.pdf.


                                                A-1

4/30/18                                                                               AC 61-98D
                                                                                      Appendix A
      12. Handbooks and Manuals (FAA): http://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/
          handbooks_manuals/:
          •   Aviation Instructor’s Handbook (FAA-H-8083-9).
          •   Handbook(s) appropriate for the category of aircraft being operated (e.g., Airplane
              Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-3)).
      13. Information for Operators (InFO) (FAA):
          http://www.faa.gov/other_visit/aviation_industry/airline_operators/airline_saf
          ety/info/all_infos/:
          •   InFO 14010, Installation, Training, and Use of Non-required/Supplemental
              Angle-of-Attack (AOA) Based Systems for General Aviation (GA) Airplanes,
              July 25, 2014.
          •   InFO 15012, Logging Instrument Approach Procedures (IAP), September 8, 2015.
      14. Instrument Proficiency Check (IPC) Guidance:
          https://www.faa.gov/pilots/training/media/IPC_Guidance.pdf.
      15. New Technologies for Pilots, Planes, and ’Ports, FAA Safety Briefing,
          May/June 2016: https://www.faa.gov/news/safety_briefing/2016/media/
          MayJun2016.pdf.
      16. New Technology in Aviation, FAA Safety Briefing, January/February 2014:
          https://www.faa.gov/news/safety_briefing/2014/media/JanFeb2014.pdf.
      17. Online resources for flight instructors, FAA Safety Team (FAASTeam):
          http://www.faasafety.gov.
      18. PAVEing the Way to Safety, FAA Safety Briefing, January/February 2017:
          https://www.faa.gov/news/safety_briefing/2017/media/JanFeb2017.pdf.
      19. Personal Minimums Worksheet, FAA Safety Briefing, March/April 2015:
          https://www.faa.gov/news/safety_briefing/2015/media/Personal-
          Minimums.pdf.
      20. Practical Test Standards (PTS):
          http://www.faa.gov/training_testing/testing/test_standards/.
      21. Risk Management and System Safety Modules:
          http://www.faa.gov/training_testing/training/fits/training/flight_instructor.
      22. Teaching Technology: Instilling the Right Aptitudes and Attitudes for Safety,
          FAA Safety Briefing, September/October 2017:
          https://www.faa.gov/news/safety_briefing/2017/media/SepOct2017.pdf.
      23. Tips for Teaching Practical Risk Management:
          https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/handbooks_manuals/aviation/media/
          1.0-Practical-Risk-Management.pdf.
      24. Weather Forces, Sources, and Resources, FAA Safety Briefing,
          March/April 2015:
          https://www.faa.gov/news/safety_briefing/2015/media/MarApr2015.pdf.


                                              A-2

4/30/18                                                                             AC 61-98D
                                                                                    Appendix A
 A.2 Industry and Professional Associations.

      1. Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA): http://www.aopa.org.
          •   AOPA Tools for Certificated Flight Instructors: https://www.aopa.org/training-and-
              safety/cfis.
      2. Aviation Weather Center: https://www.aviationweather.gov/adds/.
      3. Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA): http://eaa.org/.
      4. FlightService: https://www.1800wxbrief.com/Website/#!/.
      5. General Aviation Manufacturers Association (GAMA):
         http://www.gama.aero/.
      6. National Association of Flight Instructors (NAFI): http://www.nafinet.org/.
      7. Society of Aviation and Flight Educators (SAFE): http://www.safepilots.org.


                                             A-3

4/30/18                                                                            AC 61-98D
                                                                                   Appendix B
  APPENDIX B. SAMPLE AIRPLANE PILOT’S PROFICIENCY PRACTICE PLAN


Pilot’s Name:                                               Date:

          Flight Rules (Visual Flight Rules (VFR)) Flight Profile – Every 4–6 Weeks:

  Preflight (include the 3-P Risk Management Process (RMP: Perceive hazards, Process
   risk level, and Perform risk management).) (Refer to the 3-P Risk Management Process
   at https://www.faasafety.gov/files/gslac/courses/content/28/200/3P%20Risk%20Manage
   ment%20Process.pdf.)
  Normal taxi.
  Takeoff.
  Departure to practice area.

  CHAPS (before each maneuver):
    Clear the area.
    Heading established and noted.
    Altitude established (at least 3,000 feet above ground level (AGL)).
    Position near a suitable emergency landing area.
    Set power and aircraft configuration.
  Steep turns (both directions), altitude within 100 feet and airspeed within 10 knots.
  Power-off stalls (approach to landing) and recovery.
  Power-on stalls (takeoff/departure) and recovery.
  Ground reference maneuvers (600 feet to 1000 feet AGL).
  Pattern practice:
    Normal landing (full flaps).
    Short-field takeoff and landing over a 50-foot obstacle.
    Soft-field takeoff and landing.
  Slow flight.
  Discretional maneuver.
  Discretional maneuver.
  Secure the aircraft.
  Review your performance.
  Schedule next proficiency flight.


                                             B-1

4/30/18                                                                               AC 61-98D
                                                                                      Appendix C
         APPENDIX C. SAMPLE PILOT’S PERSONAL AERONAUTICAL GOALS


Pilot’s Name:                                        Date:

Training Goals

______     Certificate Level (Private, Commercial, Airline Transport Pilot (ATP))
______     Ratings (Instrument, Multiengine Land (MEL), Airplane Single-Engine Sea (ASES),
           Airplane Multiengine Sea (AMES), Rotorcraft, Glider, etc.)
______     Endorsements (high performance, complex, tailwheel, high altitude, etc.)
______     Phase in Pilot Proficiency Program (WINGS)
______     Instructor Qualifications (flight instructor, instrument flight instructor, multiengine
           flight instructor, advanced ground instructor (AGI), basic ground instructor (BGI),
           instrument ground instructor (IGI))
Other:

Proficiency Goals

Lower personal minimums to:
______ Ceiling
______ Visibility
______ Winds
______ Precision approach minimums
______ Non-precision approach minimums

Fly at least:
______ Times per month
______ Hours per month
______ Hours per year
______ Cross-country flights per year
______ Night hours per month

Make a cross-country trip to:

Other:

Aeronautical Training Plan of Action


                                               C-1

4/30/18                                                                                              AC 61-98D
                                                                                                     Appendix D
 APPENDIX D. SAMPLE FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR’S FLIGHT REVIEW CHECKLIST

Step 1: Preflight Review Actions                            Ratings (not necessarily inclusive):
    Scheduling                                             ______ Instrument
    Set expectations of pilot under review                 ______ Airplane Single-Engine Pilot (ASEL)
    Pilot’s aeronautical history                           ______ Multiengine Land (MEL)
    Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR)   ______ Lighter than air (LTA)
        part 91 review assignment                           ______ Rotorcraft
    Cross-country flight plan assignment                   ______ (Other)
Step 2: Ground Discussion                                   Experience (pilot):
    FAA Aviation English Language Standard (AELS)          ______ Total time
        requirement                                         ______ Last 6 months
    Regulatory review                                      ______ Average hours/month
    Cross-country flight plan review                       ______ Time since last flight review
    Risk management (RM) and personal minimums             ______ Since last instrument proficiency
                                                                    check (IPC)
Step 3: Conducting the Flight
    Physical aircraft (basic skills)                       Experience (aircraft):
    Takeoffs and stabilized approaches to landings         Aircraft type(s) you fly _____________________
    Slow flight                                            Aircraft used most often ____________________
    Stalls and recovery/spin recognition and avoidance     ______ Total time
    Recovery from unusual attitudes                        ______ Last 6 months
    Simulated loss of power/engine                         ______ Average hours/month
    Operating the aircraft by sole reference to
                                                            Experience (flight environment):
        instruments under actual or simulated conditions
                                                            Since your last flight review, approximately how
    Aeronautical decision-making (ADM)
                                                            many hours have you logged in:
    Automation system failures
                                                            ______ Day visual flight rules (VFR)
Step 4: Postflight Discussion                               ______ Day instrument flight rules (IFR)
    Replay, reflect, reconstruct, redirect                 ______ Instrument meteorological
    Questions                                                       conditions (IMC)
                                                            ______ Night VFR
Step 5: Aeronautical Health Maintenance and
                                                            ______ Night IFR
Improvement Plan
                                                            ______ Mountainous/Overwater
    Personal minimums worksheet
                                                            ______ Towered
    Personal proficiency practice plan
                                                            ______ Nontowered
    Training plan (if desired)
    Resources list                                         Type of Flying (external factors):
                                                            What percentage of your flying is for:
Sample Pilot’s Aeronautical History for Flight Review
                                                            ______ Pleasure
 Pilot:                                                     ______ Business
 Flight Instructor:                                         ______ Local
 Address:                                                   ______ Cross-country
 Phone(s):
                                                            Personal Skills Assessment:
 Email:
                                                            Strengths as a pilot?
 Pilot Certificate(s):
 ______ Private
                                                            Areas for improvement?
 ______ Commercial
 ______ Air Transport Pilot (ATP)
                                                            Aviation goals?
 ______ Flight instructor


                                                    D-1

4/30/18                                                                                      AC 61-98D
                                                                                             Appendix E
                      APPENDIX E. REGULATORY REVIEW GUIDE

                                                SIDE 1
PILOT
 Experience: Recent Flight Experience (14 CFR part 61, § 61.57).
 Responsibility:
         Authority (14 CFR part 91, § 91.3).
         Flightcrew Members at Station (§ 91.105).
         Preflight Action (§ 91.103).
         Safety Belts (§ 91.107).
         Air Traffic Control (ATC) Instructions (§ 91.123).
 Cautions:
         Careless or Reckless Operation (§ 91.13).
         Dropping Objects (§ 91.15).
         Alcohol or Drugs (§ 91.17).
         Supplemental Oxygen (§ 91.211).
         Fitness for Flight (Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM) chapter 8, section 1).
AIRCRAFT
 Airworthiness:
         Basic (§ 91.7).
         Flight Manual, Markings, and Placards (§ 91.9).
         Certifications Required (§ 91.203).
         Instrument and Equipment Requirements (§ 91.205):
           Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT) (§ 91.207).
           Position Lights (§ 91.209).
           Inoperative Instruments and Equipment (§ 91.213).
           Transponder Requirements (§ 91.215).
 Maintenance:
         Responsibility (§ 91.403).
         Maintenance Required (§ 91.405).
         Operation after Maintenance (§ 91.407).
         Maintenance Records (§ 91.417).
 Inspections:
         Annual, Airworthiness Directives (AD), 100 Hours (§ 91.409).
         Altimeter and Pitot Static System (§ 91.411).
         Very High Frequency Omni-Directional Range (VOR) Check (§ 91.171).
         Transponder (§ 91.413).
         ELT (§ 91.207).


                                                    E-1

4/30/18                                                                                  AC 61-98D
                                                                                         Appendix E

                                               SIDE 2
 Airports:
         Markings (AIM chapter 2, section 3).
         Operations (AIM chapter 4, section 3; §§ 91.125 and 91.126).
         Traffic Patterns (§ 91.126).
 Airspace:
         Altimeter Settings (AIM chapter 7, section 2; § 91.121).
         Minimum Safe Altitudes (§§ 91.119 and 91.177).
         Cruising Altitudes (AIM chapter 3, section 1, paragraph 3-1-5; §§ 91.159 and 91.179).
         Speed Limits (§ 91.117).
         Right-of-Way (§ 91.113).
         Formation (§ 91.111).
         Types of Airspace (AIM chapter 3):
           Controlled Airspace (AIM chapter 3, section 2; §§ 91.129, 91.130, 91.131, and 91.135).
           Class G Airspace (AIM chapter 3, section 3).
           Special Use (AIM chapter 3, section 4; §§ 91.133, 91.137, 91.141, 91.143, and 91.145).
         Emergency Air Traffic Rules (AIM chapter 5, section 6; § 91.139).
 Air Traffic Control and Procedures:
         Services (AIM chapter 4, section 1).
         Radio Communications (AIM chapter 4, section 2; Pilot/Controller Glossary).
         Clearances (AIM chapter 4, section 4).
         Procedures (AIM chapter 5).
 Weather:
         Meteorology (AIM chapter 7, section 1).
         Wake Turbulence (AIM chapter 7, section 3).

EXTERNAL PRESSURE
 Personal Minimums Worksheet.
 Risk Management (RM) (3-P model).
 Practical Test Standards (PTS)/Airman Certification Standards (ACS), as appropriate.


                                                 E-2

4/30/18                                                                                                        AC 61-98D
                                                                                                               Appendix F
                      APPENDIX F. SAMPLE FLIGHT REVIEW CHECKLIST

                                                               SIDE 1
                          References                                                Flight Review Checklist
          Selected portions of 14 CFR part 61, § 61.56                   Step 1: Preparation
(a) A flight review consists of a minimum of 1 hour of flight               Pilot’s Aeronautical History
training and 1 hour of ground training. The review must                     Set Expectations for Pilot Under Review
include:                                                                    14 CFR Part 91 Review Assignment
     (1) A review of the current general operating and flight               Cross-Country Flight Plan Assignment
     rules of part 91 of this chapter; and
     (2) A review of those maneuvers and procedures that,                Step 2: Ground Review
     at the discretion of the person giving the review, are                 FAA Aviation English Language Standard
     necessary for the pilot to demonstrate the safe exercise                  (AELS) Requirement
     of the privileges of the pilot certificate.                            Regulatory Review
(c) Except as provided in paragraphs (d), (e), and (g) of this              Cross-Country Flight Plan Review
section, no person may act as pilot in command of an aircraft               Weather & Weather Decision Making
unless, since the beginning of the 24th calendar month before               Risk Management and Personal Minimums
the month in which that pilot acts as pilot in command, that                General Aviation (GA) Security Issues
person has—
     (1) Accomplished a flight review given in an aircraft for
                                                                         Step 3: Flight Activities
     which that pilot is rated by an authorized instructor and              Physical Airplane (basic skills)
     (2) A logbook endorsed from an authorized instructor who               Mental Airplane Automaton and Aircraft
     gave the review certifying that the person has satisfactorily             (systems knowledge)
     completed the review.                                                  Takeoffs and Stabilized Approaches
(d) A person who has, within the period specified                              to Landings
in paragraph (c) of this section, passed any of the following               Slow Flight
need not accomplish the flight review required by this section:             Stalls and Recovery/Spin
     (1) A pilot proficiency check or practical test conducted                 Recognition/Avoidance
     by an examiner, an approved pilot check airman,                        Recovery from Unusual Attitudes
     or a U.S. Armed Force, for a pilot certificate, rating,                Simulated Loss of Power/Engine
     or operating privilege.
                                                                            Operating the Aircraft by Sole Reference
     (2) A practical test conducted by an examiner for the
     issuance of a flight instructor certificate, an additional                to Instruments Under Actual or Simulated
     rating on a flight instructor certificate, renewal of a flight            Conditions
     instructor certificate, or reinstatement of a flight instructor        Aeronautical Decision Making (ADM)
     certificate.                                                           Automation System
(e) A person who has, within the period specified                           Automation System Failures
in paragraph (c) of this section, satisfactorily accomplished            Step 4: Postflight Discussion
one or more phases of an FAA-sponsored pilot proficiency
award program need not accomplish the flight review required
                                                                            Replay, Reflect, Reconstruction, Redirect
by this section.                                                            Questions
                                                                         Step 5: Aeronautical Health Maintenance
Advisory Circular (AC) 61-65, Certification: Pilots and
Flight and Ground Instructors                                            and Improvement Plan
Completion of a Flight Review: §§ 61.56(a) and (c).                         Personal Minimums Worksheet
                                                                            Personal Proficiency Practice Plan
I certify that [First name, MI, Last name], [pilot certificate],
[certificate number], has satisfactorily completed a flight                 Training Plan (if desired)
review of § 61.56(a) on [date].                                        For aviation safety information and online resources,
/s/ [date] J. J. Jones 987654321CFI Exp. 12-31-19                                     visit www.faasafety.gov.
NOTE: No logbook entry reflecting unsatisfactory
performance on a flight review is required.


                                                                   F-1

4/30/18                                                                                                             AC 61-98D
                                                                                                                    Appendix F
                                                             SIDE 2
                      Ground Review                                                Suggested Flight Activities
PILOT:                                                              Note: Structure the flight portion as an out-and-back visual
 Experience:
    Recent Flight Experience (§ 61.57)                             flight rules (VFR) cross-country (XC), with one leg focused
 Responsibility:                                                   on XC procedures (including diversion and lost procedures)
    Authority (§ 91.3)                                             and the other leg focused on airwork (“physical airplane”
    Air Traffic Control (ATC) Instructions (§ 91.123)              skills). Suggested activities include:
    Preflight Action (§ 91.103)
    Safety Belts (§ 91.107)                                        AREA OF OPERATION (from Private Pilot PTS/ACS)
    Flightcrew at Station (§ 91.105)                                Preflight Preparation
 Cautions:                                                            Weather Information
    Careless or Reckless Operation (§ 91.13)                          Cross-Country Flight Planning
    Dropping Objects (§ 91.15)                                        Performance and Limitations
    Alcohol or Drugs (§ 91.17)                                        Operation of Systems
    Supplemental Oxygen (§ 91.211)                                  Preflight Procedures
    Fitness for Flight (Aeronautical Information                      Preflight Inspections
     Manual (AIM) chapter 8, section 1)                                Cockpit Management
AIRCRAFT:                                                              Before Takeoff Check
 Airworthiness:                                                     Airport Operations
    Basic (§ 91.7)                                                    Radio Communications
    Flight Manual, Markings, Placards (§ 91.9)                        Airport, Runway, Taxiway Signs, Markings, and Lighting
    Certification Required (§ 91.203)                               Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
    Instrument and Equipment Requirements (§ 91.205)                  Normal and Crosswind Takeoff/Climb
       Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT) (§ 91.207)                 Normal and Crosswind Approach/Landing
       Position Lights (§ 91.209)                                     Soft-Field Takeoff and Climb
       Transponder Requirements (§ 91.215)                            Soft-Field Approach and Landing
       Inoperative Instruments and Equipment (§ 91.213)               Short-Field Takeoff
 Maintenance:                                                         Short-Field Approach
    Responsibility (§ 91.403)                                         Go-Around Rejected Landing
    Maintenance Required (§ 91.405)                                 Performance Maneuver
    Maintenance Records (§ 91.417)                                    Steep Turns
    Operation After Maintenance (§ 91.407)                          Navigation
 Inspections:                                                         Pilotage and Dead Reckoning
    Annual, Airworthiness Directives, 100-Hour (§ 91.409)             Navigation Systems and Radar Services
    Altimeter and Pitot Static System (§ 91.411)                      Diversion
    Very High Frequency Omni-Directional Range (VOR) Check            Lost Procedures
      (§ 91.171)                                                     Slow Flight and Stalls
    Transponder (§ 91.413)                                            Maneuvering During Slow Flight
    ELT (§ 91.207)                                                    Power-Off Stalls
                                                                       Power-On Stalls
ENVIRONMENT:                                                           Spin Awareness
 Airports:                                                          Basic Instrument Maneuvers
   Markings (AIM chapter 2, section 3)                                Straight and Level Flight
   Operations (AIM chapter 4, section 3; §§ 91.125 and 91.126)        Turns to Headings
   Traffic Patterns (§ 91.126)                                        Recovery from Unusual Flight Attitudes
 Airspace:                                                            Radio Communications/Navigation Systems
   Altimeter Settings (§ 91.121; AIM chapter 7, section 2)          Emergency Operations
   Minimum Safe Altitudes (§§ 91.119 and 91.177)                      Emergency Approach and Landing
   Cruising Altitudes (§§ 91.159 and 91.179;                          Systems and Equipment Malfunctions
      AIM paragraph 3-1-5)                                             Automation Failure: Failure of Autopilot and Avionics
   Speed Limits (§ 91.117)                                          Postflight Procedures
   Right-of-Way (§ 91.113)                                            After Landing, Parking, Securing
   Formation (§ 91.111)
   Types of Airspace (AIM chapter 3):
       Controlled Airspace (AIM chapter 3, section 2; §§ 91.129,
          91.130, 91.131, and 91.135)
       Class G Airspace (AIM chapter 3, section 3)
       Special Use (AIM chapter 3, section 4; §§ 91.133, 91.137,
          91.141, 91.143, and 91.145)
   Emergency Air Traffic Rules (§ 91.139; AIM chapter 5,
      section 6)
 ATC and Procedures:
   Services (AIM chapter 4, section 1)
   Radio Communications (AIM chapter 4, section 2 and Pilot
      Controller Glossary)
   Clearances (AIM chapter 4, section 4)
   Procedures (AIM chapter 5)
 Weather:
   Meteorology (AIM chapter 7, section 1)
   Wake Turbulence (AIM chapter 7, section 3)
EXTERNAL PRESSURE:
 Personal Minimums Worksheet
 Risk Management (3-P model)
 Practical Test Standards (PTS)/Airman Certification
  Standards (ACS)


                                                               F-2

4/30/18                                                                                                 AC 61-98D
                                                                                                        Appendix G
     APPENDIX G. SAMPLE PILOT’S INSTRUMENT EXPERIENCE SUMMARY

Pilot’s Name:                                           Flight Instructor:
Address:
Phone(s):                                               Email:
Type of Pilot Certificate(s):                          Rating(s):
  ______    Private                                         ______   Instrument
  ______    Commercial                                      ______   Multiengine
  ______    Airline Transport Pilot (ATP)                   ______   Rotorcraft
  ______    Flight Instructor                               ______   Glider
                                                            ______   Lighter-than-air (LTA)
Experience (pilot):
  ______    Total time
  ______    Last 6 months
  ______    Average hours/month
  ______    Time logged since last instrument proficiency check (IPC)

Experience (aircraft):
Aircraft type(s) you fly
Aircraft used most often
For this aircraft: Total time               Last 6 months                         Average hours/month

Experience (flight environment): Approximately how many hours logged in:
  ______    Day visual flight rules (VFR)
  ______    Day instrument flight rules (IFR)
  ______    Instrument meteorological conditions (IMC)
  ______    Night VFR
  ______    Night IFR
  ______    Approaches
  ______    Approaches to minimums
  ______    Approaches in last 6 months
Type of Flying (external factors): What percentage of your flying is for:
  ______    Pleasure
  ______    Business
  ______    Local
  ______    Cross-country
Personal Skills Assessment:
Strengths as a pilot?
Areas for improvement?
Aviation goals?


                                                       G-1

4/30/18                                                                                         AC 61-98D
                                                                                                Appendix H
   APPENDIX H. SAMPLE INSTRUMENT TRAINING AND PROFICIENCY PLAN

Pilot’s Name:                                         Flight Instructor:
Date:                                                 Review Date:

Instrument Training Goals
 ______     Certificate Level (Private, Commercial, Airline Transport Pilot (ATP))
 ______     Ratings (Instrument, Multiengine Land (MEL), Airplane Single-Engine Sea (ASES),
            Airplane Multiengine Sea (AMES))
 ______     Phase in Pilot Proficiency Program (WINGS)
 ______     Instructor Qualifications (flight instructor, instrument flight instructor, multiengine flight
            instructor, advanced ground instructor (AGI), basic ground instructor (BGI), instrument
            ground instructor (IGI))
Other:

Instrument Proficiency Goals

Lower personal minimums to:
 ______     Ceiling
 ______     Visibility
 ______     Winds
 ______     Precision approach minimums
 ______     Nonprecision approach minimums

Fly instrument flight rules (IFR)/instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) at least:
 ______     Times per month
 ______     Hours per month
 ______     Hours per year
 ______     Cross-country flights per year
 ______     Night hours per month

Make an IFR/IMC cross-country trip to:
Other:


Aeronautical Training Plan of Action


                                                   H-1

4/30/18                                                                                                AC 61-98D
                                                                                                       Appendix J
  APPENDIX J. SAMPLE FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR’S INSTRUMENT PROFICIENCY
                         CHECK CHECKLIST

                                                           SIDE 1

                         References                                                Checklist for IPC
Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR)               Step 1: Preparation
Part 61, § 61.57(d)—Instrument Proficiency Check.
                                                                      Set Expectations for Pilot Under Review
Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, a person         Regulatory Review
who has failed to meet the instrument experience                      Cross-Country Flight Plan Assignment
requirements of paragraph (c) for more than six calendar
                                                                   Step 2: Ground Review
months may reestablish instrument currency only
by completing an instrument proficiency check.                        FAA Aviation English Language Standard
The instrument proficiency check must consist of the areas                (AELS) Requirement
of operation and instrument tasks required in the instrument          Preflight
rating practical test standards.                                      Taxi, Takeoff, Departure
(1) The instrument proficiency check must be–                         En Route
     (i) In an aircraft that is appropriate to the aircraft           Arrival and Approach
     category;                                                        Missed Approach
     (ii) For other than a glider, in a flight simulator or flight
     training device that is representative of the aircraft        Step 3: Flight Activities
     category; or                                                     Aircraft Control by Reverence to Flight
     (iii) For a glider, in a single-engine airplane or a glider.         Instruments
(2) The instrument proficiency check must be given by—                Systems and Procedures
     (i) An examiner;                                                 Aeronautical Decision Making (ADM)
     (ii) A person authorized by the U.S. Armed Forces                Stabilized Approaches and Landing
     to conduct instrument flight tests, provided the person
     being tested is a member of the U.S. Armed Forces;            Step 4: Postflight Discussion
     (iii) A company check pilot who is authorized                    Replay, Reflect, Reconstruction, Redirect
     to conduct instrument flight tests under part 121, 125,          Questions
     or 135 of this chapter or subpart K of part 91 of this
     chapter, and provided that both the check pilot and the Step 5: Aeronautical Health Maintenance and
     pilot being tested are employees of that operator             Improvement Plan
     or fractional ownership program manager, as applicable;          Personal Minimums Worksheet
     (iv) An authorized instructor; or                                Personal Proficiency Practice Plan
     (v) A person approved by the Administrator to conduct            Training Plan (if desired)
     instrument practical tests.
Advisory Circular (AC) 61-65, Certification: Pilots and            For aviation safety information and online resources,
Flight and Ground Instructors                                                      visit www.faasafety.gov.
Completion of an Instrument Proficiency Check:
§ 61.57(d).
I certify that [First name, MI, Last name], [pilot certificate],
[certificate number], has satisfactorily completed the
instrument proficiency check of § 61.57(d) in a (list make
and model of aircraft) on [date].
/s/ [date] J. J. Jones 987654321CFI Exp. 12-31-19
NOTE: No logbook entry reflecting unsatisfactory
performance on an instrument proficiency check is required.


                                                           J-1

4/30/18                                                                                 AC 61-98D
                                                                                        Appendix J

                                             SIDE 2
               Ground Review                                Suggested Flight Activities
PILOT:                                          Note: Structure the flight portion as an
 Recency of Experience (§ 61.57)               out-and-back IFR cross-country (XC), with one leg
 Pilot-in-Command (PIC) Responsibilities and   focused on XC procedures (including missed
   Authority (14 CFR part 91, § 91.3)           approach and diversion procedures) and the other
 Preflight Actions (§ 91.103)                  leg focused on airwork (aircraft control). Suggested
 Medical Facts for Pilots (Aeronautical        activities include:
   Information Manual (AIM) chapter 8)          AREA OF OPERATION
                                                 Preflight Preparation
AIRCRAFT:                                             Weather Information
 Fuel Requirements (§ 91.167)                        Cross-Country Flight Planning
 Equipment Check (Very High Frequency           Preflight Procedures
   Omni-Directional Range (VOR)) (§ 91.171)           Aircraft Systems Related to IFR
 Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) Two-Way Radio            Operations
   Communications Failure (§ 91.185)                  Aircraft Flight Instruments and Navigation
 Malfunction Reports (§ 91.187)                         Equipment
 Required Instruments and Equipment                    Instrument Cockpit Check
   (§ 91.205)                                       ATC    Clearances and Procedures
 Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT)                 ATC Clearances
   (§ 91.207)                                         Compliance with Departure, En Route, and
 Aircraft Lights (§ 91.209)                             Arrival Procedures and Clearances
 Inoperative Instruments and Equipment                 Holding Procedures
   (§ 91.213)                                       Flight  by Reference to Instruments
 Altimeter and Pitot-Static System Tests               Basic  Instrument Flight Maneuvers
   (§ 91.411)                                         Recovery from Unusual Flight Attitudes
 Air Traffic Control (ATC) Transponder Tests       Navigation   Systems
   (§ 91.413)                                           Intercepting/Tracking  Navigational
                                                         Systems and Distance Measuring
ENVIRONMENT:                                             Equipment (DME) Arcs
 ATC Instructions (§ 91.123)                    Instrument Approach Procedures
 IFR Flight Plan (§ 91.169)                          Nonprecision Approach (NPA)
 ATC Clearance and Flight Plan (§ 91.173)            Precision Approach (PA)
 Takeoff (TO) and Landing (LDG) in IFR               Missed Approach
   (§ 91.175)                                         Circling Approach
 Minimum IFR Altitudes (§ 91.177)                    Landing from a Straight-in or Circling
 IFR Cruising Altitudes (§ 91.179)                      Approach
 Course to be Flown (§ 91.181)                  Emergency Operations
 IFR Two-Way Communications (§ 91.183)               Loss of Communications
 Navigation Aids (AIM chapter 1)                     One Engine Inoperative During Straight
 ATC (AIM chapter 4)                                    and Level Flight and Turns (Multiengine
 Air Traffic Procedures (AIM chapter 5)                 Airplane)
                                                      One Engine Inoperative—Instrument
EXTERNAL PRESSURE:                                       Approach (Multiengine Airplane)
 IFR Two-Way Radio Communications Failure              Loss of Primary Flight Instrument
   (§ 91.185)                                            Indicators
                                                      Automation Failure: Failure of Autopilot
 Emergency Procedures (AIM chapter 6)                   and Avionics
 National Security and Interception Procedures  Postflight Procedures
   (AIM chapter 5, section 6)                         Checking Instruments and Equipment


                                                J-2

                             Advisory Circular Feedback Form

If you find an error in this AC, have recommendations for improving it, or have suggestions for
new items/subjects to be added, you may let us know by contacting the General Aviation and
Commercial Division (AFS-800) or the Flight Standards Directives Management Officer at
9-AWA-AFS-140-Directives@faa.gov.
Subject: AC 61-98D, Currency Requirements and Guidance for the Flight Review and
Instrument Proficiency Check
Date: _____________________

Please check all appropriate line items:


     An error (procedural or typographical) has been noted in paragraph ____________
     on page _______.

     Recommend paragraph _____________ on page __________ be changed as follows:

     ______________________________________________________________________

     ______________________________________________________________________

     In a future change to this AC, please cover the following subject:
     (Briefly describe what you want added.)

     ______________________________________________________________________

     ______________________________________________________________________

     Other comments:

     ______________________________________________________________________

     ______________________________________________________________________

     I would like to discuss the above. Please contact me.


Submitted by:                                                Date: ______________________