                                                                                                  InFO
                                                                                                  Information for Operators

                                                                                                  InFO 23001
 U.S. Department                                                                                  DATE: 01/09/23
 of Transportation
                                                                                                  Flight Standards Service
 Federal Aviation
                                                                                                  Washington, DC
 Administration

http://www.faa.gov/other_visit/aviation_industry/airline_operators/airline_safety/info___________________
An InFO contains valuable information for operators that should help them meet certain administrative, regulatory, or
operational requirements, with relatively low urgency or impact on safety. The contents of this document do not have the force
and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the
public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.

Subject: Use of Aircraft Approach Category During Instrument Approach Operations.

Purpose: This InFO cancels SAFO 12005, highlights Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM) guidance
(Para 5-4-7), and serves to provide expanded information about the aircraft approach category to be used
during instrument approach operations, as determined by the aircraft’s certification authority.

Background: Aircraft approach category is a grouping of aircraft based on a Vref (reference landing
speed), if specified, or if Vref is not specified, 1.3 Vso (stalling speed or minimum steady flight speed in
the landing configuration), both at the maximum certificated landing weight. Vref, Vso, and the maximum
certificated landing weight are those values as established by the certification authority. In 2002, Title 14
of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR), Part 97, § 97.3 was changed to include Vref as well as 1.3
Vso to establish approach category. This speed, determined at the maximum certificated landing weight,
establishes the lowest applicable approach category for all instrument approaches regardless of actual
landing weight.

Discussion: An aircraft’s approach category does not change if the actual landing weight is less than the
maximum certificated landing weight. This certificated approach category is permanent and independent
of the changing conditions of day-to-day operations. Aircraft may not be flown to the instrument approach
minima of a slower approach category (e.g., a category C aircraft may not utilize category B minimums).

If it becomes necessary to operate at a speed in excess of the upper limit of the speed range of an
approach category, the minimums for the higher category should be used if available. This may occur
with certain aircraft types when operating in heavy/gusty wind, icing, or non-normal conditions. For
example, an airplane that is certified as category C, but is circling to land at a speed of 145 knots, should
use the approach category D minima. Pilots are responsible for determining when a higher approach
category applies. Regardless of approach category, when circling to land, the pilot must, in accordance
with § 97.20, maneuver the aircraft within the circling approach protected area for that category to
achieve the obstacle and terrain clearances provided by procedure design criteria.

A pilot who chooses an alternative method when it is necessary to maneuver at a speed that exceeds the
category speed limit (for example, where higher category minimums are not published) should consider
the following factors that can significantly affect the actual ground track flown:


Distributed by: Flight Standards

   •   Bank Angle - The angle of bank used during circling approaches may significantly impact the turn
       radius. Conversely, pilots should be aware that using an excessive bank angle when executing a
       circling approach can lead to an unstabilized approach or possibly loss of aircraft control.
   •   Indicated Airspeed - If a pilot chooses to operate at a higher speed, other factors should be
       modified to ensure that the aircraft remains within the circling approach protected area.
   •   Wind Speed/Direction – Downwind turns may significantly impact the turn radius. Therefore,
       pilots should carefully plan the initiation of all turns to ensure that the aircraft remains within the
       circling approach protected area when adjusting for winds.
   •   Pilot Technique – Pilots should take all of these factors into account when planning and executing
       instrument approaches to ensure a safe, stabilized approach is performed within the protected area.

Information provided in this InFO does not supersede, but augments circling guidance published in the
Instrument Procedures Handbook (FAA-H-8261-16B), Chapter 4, the Instrument Flying Handbook
(FAA-H-8083-15B) Chapter 10, and the Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM), Section 5-4-7.
Operators should also consider if and when it is appropriate for pilots to conduct a circling approach at a
speed in excess of published limits and provide specific guidance (i.e., Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs), Safety Management System (SMS), etc.).

Recommended Action: Directors of Safety, Directors of Operations, Directors of Training, Training
Center Managers, Check Pilots, Training Pilots, flightcrews and pilot(s) in command (PIC) must ensure
that an approach speed category that is less than the aircraft’s published approach speed category (as
determined by the aircraft’s maximum certificated landing weight, per § 97.3) is never used. Additionally,
when an approach speed is used that is above the aircraft’s published approach speed category,
pilots/operators should exercise care and must remain within the instrument approach protected area, per
§ 97.20 to achieve the obstacle and terrain clearances provided by procedure design criteria. Operators are
also reminded to conduct a safety risk analysis on any change as part of their SMS process.

Contact: Questions or comments regarding this InFO should be directed to the Flight Technologies and
Procedures Division at 202-267-8790.


Distributed by: Flight Standards