U.S. Department
of Transportation
                                                Advisory
Federal Aviation
Administration                                  Circular
Subject: Use of Portable Electronic Devices     Date: 10/27/17           AC No: 91.21-1D
         Aboard Aircraft                        Initiated by: AFS-300    Change:

  1 PURPOSE OF THIS ADVISORY CIRCULAR (AC). This AC provides aircraft
    owners, operators (i.e., certificate holders), and the flying public with information and
    guidance to comply with Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 91,
    § 91.21. Section 91.21 was established because of the potential for portable electronic
    devices (PED) to interfere with aircraft navigation or communication systems, and
    prohibits the operation of PEDs not installed aboard U.S.-registered civil aircraft while
    operating under instrument flight rules (IFR). Section 91.21 permits the use of specified
    PEDs and other devices the operator of the aircraft has determined will not interfere with
    the safe operation of the aircraft. The recommendations contained herein are one means,
    but not the only means, of complying with § 91.21 requirements pertaining to the
    operation of PEDs.

  2 AUDIENCE. This AC is for aircraft owners, operators, and the flying public.

  3 WHERE YOU CAN FIND THIS AC. You can find this AC, ACs referenced in this
    document, on the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)’s website at
    http://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/advisory_circulars. You can find a current list of
    Information for Operators (InFO) at
    http://www.faa.gov/other_visit/aviation_industry/airline_operators/airline_safety/info/all
    _infos.

  4 WHAT THIS AC CANCELS. This AC cancels AC 91.21-1C, Use of Portable
    Electronic Devices Aboard Aircraft, dated May 7, 2015.

  5 RELATED 14 CFR PARTS. You can find the current regulations at
    http://www.ecfr.gov.

      •   Part 91, § 91.21.
      •   Part 121, § 121.306.
      •   Part 125, § 125.204.
      •   Part 135, § 135.144.

  6 BACKGROUND.

6.1 Section 91.21—Portable Electronic Devices. Section 91.21—formerly § 91.19—was
    established in May 1961 to prohibit the operation of frequency modulation (FM)

10/27/17                                                                             AC 91.21-1D


      receivers since they were determined to interfere with the operation of aircraft navigation
      and communication systems. The FAA subsequently determined other PEDs could be
      potentially hazardous to aircraft systems if operated aboard aircraft. Amendment 91-35
      amended the scope of former § 91.19 to prohibit the use of additional PEDs aboard
      certain U.S.-registered civil aircraft. Section 91.21, as adopted, was drafted to require the
      air carrier or commercial operator to determine whether a particular PED will cause radio
      frequency (RF) interference when operated aboard its aircraft. This AC uses the term
      “operator” throughout to mean pilot in command (PIC), renter-pilot, or air carrier
      certificate holder.

 6.2 AC 20-164, Designing and Demonstrating Aircraft Tolerance to Portable Electronic
     Devices. In June 2017, the FAA published aircraft certification guidance AC 20-164.
     This AC refers to RTCA DO-307A, Aircraft Design and Certification for Portable
     Electronic Device (PED) Tolerance, as an acceptable method for demonstrating aircraft
     tolerance to intentional transmissions and spurious emissions from PEDs. The AC also
     provides guidance for aircraft certification applicants to gain FAA approval for data
     demonstrating aircraft tolerance to PEDs.

 6.3 InFOs 13010 and 13010SUP. Based on some PED Aviation Rulemaking Committee
     (ARC) recommendations, the FAA published InFO 13010, Expanding Use of Passenger
     Portable Electronic Devices (PED), on October 31, 2013, and InFO 13010SUP, FAA Aid
     to Operators for the Expanded Use of Passenger PEDs, on June 9, 2014. These
     companion documents provide a near-term method for an operator to determine if it can
     safely expand PED use throughout various phases of flight, and what actions it should
     take when making those determinations. InFO 13010 and InFO 13010SUP provide
     acceptable methods for aircraft operators to expand PED use in compliance with
     §§ 91.21, 121.306, 125.204, and 135.144.

 6.4 InFO 17008, The Transportation of Portable Electronic Devices (PED) in Checked
     Baggage. The FAA published InFO 17008 to raise awareness of the risks associated with
     prohibiting the carriage of PEDs in carry-on baggage. This InFO requests the aircraft
     operators to apply safety risk assessments through their safety management systems
     (SMS) process to identify and mitigate the risks associated with carriage of PEDs
     containing lithium batteries.

 6.5 PED ARC. On January 7, 2013, the FAA Administrator established the PED ARC to
     provide a forum to review PED policy and guidance by the U.S. and European aviation
     communities and government regulatory groups. The ARC made recommendations to
     further clarify, and provide guidance on, allowing additional PED usage without
     compromising safe aircraft operation. The ARC reviewed current available data
     submitted by the FAA, other Federal agencies, including the Federal Communications
     Commission (FCC), industry associations, and ARC subject matter experts (SME). The
     ARC also reviewed current guidance material and information on PEDs, including
     documents developed by the FAA, RTCA, and the FCC; and spent 9 months completing
     a report detailing expanded PED use. The ARC submitted its final report and
     recommendations to the FAA on September 30, 2013. The report contained


                                                2

10/27/17                                                                         AC 91.21-1D


      recommendations that could be implemented in the very near term, as well as changes in
      policy and guidance needing additional time to consider and implement.

 6.6 RTCA DO-199, Potential Interference to Aircraft Electronic Equipment from
     Devices Carried Aboard. RTCA Special Committee (SC)-156 studied the potential for
     interference from PEDs, and, in September 1988, released volumes I and II of
     RTCA DO-199.

 6.7 RTCA DO-233, Portable Electronic Devices Carried Onboard Aircraft. RTCA
     SC-177 did a further study of these devices and in August 1996 released RTCA DO-233.
     The findings and conclusions from this and the RTCA DO-199 study helped the FAA
     establish policy enabling non-transmitting PED usage during the cruise phase of flight.

 6.8 RTCA DO-294, Guidance on Allowing Transmitting Portable Electronic Devices
     (T-PEDS) on Aircraft. In March 2003, the FAA requested that RTCA form an SC to
     evaluate and develop guidance to assess the impact and risk of intentionally radiating
     PEDs, or transmitting PEDs, brought onto civil aircraft by passengers. These PEDs
     include mobile telephones, computers with wireless network capabilities, and other
     wireless-enabled devices such as Personal Digital Assistants (PDA). On
     December 16, 2008, RTCA released RTCA DO-294, prepared by RTCA SC-202. RTCA
     also released RTCA DO-294 versions A, B, and C.

 6.9 RTCA DO-307, Aircraft Design and Certification for Portable Electronic Device
     (PED) Tolerance. In October 2007, RTCA released RTCA DO-307 (and Change 1 in
     December 2008), prepared by RTCA SC-202. RTCA DO-307 defines qualification
     recommendations for aircraft system and equipment RF susceptibility, providing
     tolerance to RF from intentionally transmitting PEDs. Also, RTCA DO-307 defines
     acceptable interference path loss between aircraft radio receivers and spurious RF
     emissions from transmitting and non-transmitting PEDs. On December 15, 2016, RTCA
     published RTCA DO-307A, prepared by SC-234. This revision 1) changed certain PED
     tolerance requirements for back-door coupling based on existing high intensity radiated
     fields (HIRF) requirements, 2) updated front-door interference path loss targets based on
     criticality of aircraft radios, and 3) clarified requirements for aircraft equipment
     configuration management.

6.10 RTCA DO-363, Guidance for the Development of Portable Electronic Devices
     (PED) Tolerance for Civil Aircraft. On December 15, 2016, RTCA published RTCA
     DO-363, prepared by SC-234. This guide takes into account the safety risk assessment
     derived from 1) PED ARC Final Report, Appendix F: Avionics System Functional
     Hazard Risk Assessment; 2) FAA InFO 13010; 3) InFO 13010SUP; and
     4) industry-learned best practices since the 2013 publication of these documents.
     RTCA DO-363 provides a guide to aircraft operators, aircraft manufacturers, equipment
     manufacturers, certification applicants, maintenance personnel, and maintenance service
     providers in establishing an aircraft as PED tolerant, and sustaining PED tolerance
     throughout the aircraft’s lifecycle. RTCA DO-363 supersedes guidance in
     RTCA DO-294C.


                                              3

10/27/17                                                                            AC 91.21-1D


       Note: To obtain the PED report or any of the RTCA documents referenced in this
       AC, see paragraph 12.

   7 TECHNICAL SUBSTANTIATION.

 7.1 Permitting the Use of PEDs. The related 14 CFRs in paragraph 5 enable PED operation
     not interfering with aircraft navigation or communication systems, per operator
     determination. By regulation, the operator only is responsible for permitting the use of a
     particular PED technology. Determining the potential for PED interference on the aircraft
     communication, navigation, surveillance, and other electronic systems resolves the
     decision to allow PED usage. For operating certificate holders, the decision to allow PED
     usage must be made by the operator by following the results of an electronic interference
     evaluation using acceptable methods. Operators can use acceptable methods published in
     paragraph 7.2 (below) of this AC, or equivalent methods specifically accepted by the
     FAA. If the operator lacks the personal knowledge of these methods, the operator should
     consult an appropriately trained and knowledgeable expert.

 7.2 Acceptable Methodology. Policies for allowing the use of PEDs originally addressed
     analysis of individual transmitting and non-transmitting PEDs to determine possible
     interference. However, the number and variety of PEDs in use today make analysis of
     individual devices impractical. The following paragraphs describe acceptable methods to
     evaluate an operator’s aircraft fleet to determine appropriate PED use.

7.2.1 Aircraft Designed and Certified PED Tolerant. Aircraft manufacturers with access to
      aircraft electronic system qualifications and aircraft radio receiver antenna installation
      data can easily demonstrate an aircraft meets the requirements of RTCA DO-307A.
      Operators may obtain statements of such demonstrations from an aircraft manufacturer to
      substantiate PED tolerance of the aircraft. Operators can also use the RTCA DO-307A
      methods in demonstrating PED tolerance of their aircraft. RTCA DO-307A separates
      demonstration methods for tolerance to intentional transmissions from PEDs versus
      tolerance to spurious emissions from PEDs. Aircraft with an FAA-approved system—
      such as an Onboard Mobile Telecommunications System (OMTS), Wireless Fidelity
      (WiFi), airborne access systems (AASs), or Network Control Units (NCUs)—are
      considered PED-tolerant for PEDs used with the installed system. If an aircraft model has
      demonstrated tolerance for both transmitting and non-transmitting PEDs, the operator
      may allow PED use during all phases of flight on this aircraft model.

7.2.2 Aircraft Not Designed and Certified PED Tolerant. An operator may choose to
      conduct a safety risk assessment following the process in RTCA DO-363 if it 1) does not
      have a designed and certified PED-tolerant aircraft, and 2) chooses not to test its aircraft
      fleet types according to RTCA DO-307A or obtain supporting documentation from an
      aircraft manufacturer. The operator’s assessment must evaluate the avionics configuration
      of its fleet and failure modes of communication, navigation, surveillance, and other
      electronic systems with respect to electromagnetic interference. This assessment
      ultimately outlines mitigations and controls the operator needs to adopt to expand PED
      use into various phases of flight.


                                                4

10/27/17                                                                              AC 91.21-1D


       Note: For non-HIRF or partial HIRF aircraft, the RTCA DO-363 safety
       assessment process requires backdoor coupling assessments for flight data
       recorder (FDR) and cockpit voice recorder (CVR) equipment. The existing FDR
       and CVR Technical Standard Order (TSO) environmental qualification is
       acceptable verification, so further backdoor assessment of the FDR and CVR
       equipment is not required by the operator.

7.2.3 Aircraft Not Demonstrated PED Tolerant. If the operator has not demonstrated PED
      tolerance for their aircraft, they may allow PED operation during cruise flight. If
      interference to aircraft systems from PEDs is experienced during cruise flight, the devices
      causing interference should be isolated, and applicable conditions recorded. The device
      responsible for the interference should be turned off.

   8 OPERATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS.

 8.1 Operator Procedures. If an operator allows PEDs aboard its aircraft or the aircraft being
     operated, procedures should be established to control PED use during aircraft operations.
     RCTA DO-363 section 7.5 and InFO 13010SUP provide further guidance on what to
     include in the operator’s policies, procedures, and training programs. In general, the
     procedures should address:

       1. PEDs approved for use onboard the aircraft;
       2. Times of approved PED operation;
       3. How and when PEDs must be secured or stowed;
       4. PED modes of operation used and not used;
       5. How and when to inform passengers of the aircraft operator’s PED policies
          and procedures; and
       6. How to manage scenarios such as suspected or confirmed electromagnetic
          interference, PED unit or battery smoke or fire, or other scenarios.

 8.2 Passenger Communication. This paragraph outlines methods to inform passengers of
     permissible times, conditions, and limitations of PED usage. These methods may be
     accomplished through the departure briefing; passenger information cards; flightcrew,
     flight attendant (F/A), or prerecorded announcements; or other methods deemed
     appropriate by the operator. Operators should inform passengers of PED use restrictions,
     such as prior to departure, after takeoff (at 10,000 feet), prior to landing (at 10,000 feet),
     and after landing. For air carrier operations conducted under part 121 or 135, the
     limitations, at a minimum, should state the use of all such devices—except medical
     electronic devices such as heart pacemakers or portable oxygen concentrators (POC)—is
     prohibited during phases of operation when they could interfere with communication or
     navigation equipment onboard the aircraft or the ability of the flightcrew to give
     instructions in the event of an emergency. Methods of passenger communication
     may include:


                                                5

10/27/17                                                                               AC 91.21-1D


       1. Procedures to terminate operation of PEDs suspected of causing interference
          with aircraft systems.
       2. Procedures for reporting PED interference to a responsible Flight Standards
          office.
       3. Procedures for cockpit-to-cabin coordination and cockpit flightcrew
          monitoring procedures.
       4. Procedures for determining acceptability of PEDs for operation aboard its
          aircraft. Acceptable PED identification should be clearly spelled out in oral
          departure briefings and by written material provided to passengers.
       5. Procedures for takeoff and landing preparation must be considered when
          allowing the PED operation during these phases of flight. Operators must
          recognize that the potential for personal injury to passengers is a crucial
          consideration, as well as the possibility of missing significant safety
          announcements during takeoff and landing. InFO 13010 and InFO 13010SUP
          provide guidance to address these considerations.

 8.3 Use of a PED as an Electronic Flight Bag (EFB). An EFB is any device, or
     combination of devices, actively displaying EFB applications authorized per AC 120-76,
     Authorization for Use of Electronic Flight Bags. EFB applications may be displayed on a
     PED. Additional guidance for part 91 operations can be found in AC 91-78, Use of
     Class 1 or Class 2 Electronic Flight Bag (EFB).

8.3.1 If an aircraft is eligible for passenger PED use in all phases of flight without restriction,
      the same eligibility may apply to PEDs authorized as EFBs per OpSpec/MSpec/LOA
      A061, Use of Electronic Flight Bag.

8.3.2 If an aircraft is not eligible for PED use for all phases of operation, then operators should
      follow guidance in paragraph 7.2.2 or AC 120-76 for other EFB PED test methods.

8.3.3 During part 121 operations, if a crewmember uses a PED displaying an EFB application
      not authorized per OpSpec/MSpec/LOA A061, then he or she may be violating
      § 121.542(d). Per this section, flightcrew members must not use wireless communications
      devices or laptop computers for personal use while at their duty station on the flight deck
      while the aircraft is in flight, unless that usage is per FAA approved operational
      procedures. For more information, refer to InFO 14006, Prohibition on Personal Use of
      Electronic Devices on the Flight Deck.

 8.4 Safety Management System (SMS). A vital part of an SMS is to continuously monitor
     performance of changed functions and measure performance against planned goals.
     When expanding the use of PEDs, operators should adopt the principles of safety
     assurance to validate those operations. Operators should implement a monitoring or
     control program to continuously assess a PED risk.


                                                 6

10/27/17                                                                            AC 91.21-1D


   9 CELLULAR AND ONBOARD TELEPHONE SYSTEMS.

 9.1 Restricting Airborne Cellular Telephone Use. There are additional considerations for
     PEDs with cellular or mobile telephony capabilities. These PEDs include mobile
     telephones and computers with cellular wireless network capabilities. The FCC prohibits
     cellular telephone operation while airborne, as noted in Title 47 of the Code of Federal
     Regulations (47 CFR) part 22, § 22.925. This restriction is valid for all aircraft without
     technical provisions that enable control of onboard mobile devices to eliminate
     interference between ground-based cellular stations and airborne cellular devices. If
     technical provisions are installed, compliant with, or exempt from 47 CFR § 22.925, then
     usage of cellular-enabled PEDs is acceptable.

 9.2 Compliance With FCC Rules. The FAA supports this restriction on airborne cellular
     telephone use while in U.S. airspace. The FAA allows the use of cellular telephones in
     aircraft while on the ground. While airborne, operators should instruct passengers to turn
     off cellular telephones, disable a PED’s cellular transmitting functions, or place PEDs in
     airplane mode that have cellular or mobile telephony capabilities. The operator’s
     procedures should be clearly described in oral briefings prior to departure or in written
     material provided to passengers.

9.2.1 If an operator allows passengers to use an installed mobile telephone system, then the
      operator should instruct passengers to turn off cellular telephones, disable PED cellular
      transmitting functions, or place PEDs in airplane mode that have cellular mobile
      telephony capabilities when the aircraft is entering U.S. airspace. The installed mobile
      telephone system should provide an automatic indication of U.S. airspace entry.

9.2.2 If the FCC revises the restrictions mentioned above, the switch-off procedures, necessary
      for entering U.S. airspace, will become invalid.

 9.3 Procedures for Air-to-Ground Communication. Installed air-to-ground telephone
     systems may be used while airborne or on the ground. Such systems are installed, tested,
     and certified per FAA aircraft certification and airworthiness standards. The operator’s
     procedures for using installed telephone systems should be clearly described in oral
     briefings prior to departure or in written material provided to each passenger.

  10 CARGO-TRACKING DEVICES, DATA LOGGERS, RADIO FREQUENCY
     IDENTIFICATION (RFID), AND ELECTRONIC BAG TAGS. This paragraph
     applies to PEDs designed for use on aircraft in locations inaccessible to the flightcrew
     during flight. Because this class of PEDs cannot be turned off manually in the event of an
     emergency, the aircraft operators must ensure certain design and operational
     considerations are addressed. The operator must ensure these PEDs meet the following
     criteria:

10.1 PED Design Information. The operator must obtain and review the following device
     manufacturer information to ensure certain design and operational considerations are
     addressed:


                                                7

10/27/17                                                                            AC 91.21-1D


        •   Pictures of the device and peripherals;
        •   Product label;
        •   Operational description of device and peripherals;
        •   Manufacturer statement of strict design and production controls; and
        •   Battery design standard and relevant battery qualification documentation if the device
            contains a lithium battery. Examples of design standards and documentation are
            TSO-C142a, Non-Rechargeable Lithium Cells and Batteries, dated August 7, 2006,
            approval; IEEE 1625/1725 qualification; or other qualification report.

 10.2 Emissions Limits and Peripheral Devices. During all modes of operation, the device
      meets the RF radiated emissions limits in RTCA DO-160, Environmental Conditions and
      Test Procedures for Airborne Equipment, Section 21, Category H. Testing must include
      peripheral devices used with the device during normal operations. Typically, peripherals
      are external sensors or associated wiring. For additional guidance, refer to
      RTCA DO-357, User Guide: Supplement to DO-160.

 10.3 Means to Shut Off PED. If the test described in paragraph 10.2 fails or is not met, then
      the device must be designed with a minimum of two independent means to 1) turn off
      completely, 2) turn off cellular or mobile functions, or 3) a combination of both when
      airborne.

10.3.1 These independent means must identify different sources, when airborne. For example, a
       device designed to sense rapid altitude changes and acceleration to turn off cellular
       transmissions is an acceptable design containing two different sources. However, a
       device designed with two vertical accelerometers is not an acceptable design because the
       sources are not different.

10.3.2 The device may use low-powered wireless communications during flight without the
       need to comply with paragraph 10.2.1. RTCA DO-363 states: “[e]xperience shows that
       low-power emission levels do not affect aircraft systems. The low-power emission limit
       is 100mW EIRP (equivalent isotropic radiated power). Wireless communication
       standards which are limited to this level do not need to be analyzed for backdoor
       coupling. This includes Bluetooth (IEEE 802.15.1), ZigBee (IEEE 802.15.4). 100mW
       may be conservatively considered representative maximum operating power of normal
       in-band WLAN (IEEE 802.11) output power level in the 2.4GHz ISM band.” Operators
       should review WLAN (IEEE 802.11) device output power levels, because WLAN
       devices approved in the United States often have maximum output power that
       significantly exceeds 100mW EIRP.

 10.4 Signals. The device must not emit disturbing signals, such as buzzing alarms or strobe
      lights, during transport.

 10.5 PED Batteries. For batteries of devices, the FAA recommends a limit of 0.3 grams or
      less per lithium metal cell or 2.7 watt-hours per lithium ion cell.


                                                 8

10/27/17                                                                            AC 91.21-1D


  11 MEDICAL-PORTABLE ELECTRONIC DEVICES (M-PED). This section applies
     to M-PEDs, devices medically necessary to support physiological functions, which
     passengers may use at all times, and do not need to be switched off.

11.1 Considerations for M-PEDs. The FAA believes sufficient risk mitigation can allow safe
     operation of M-PEDs during flight, yet does not prevent voluntary inclusion of M-PEDs
     in an operator’s carry-on baggage program, general operating procedures manual, or
     personal items policy. The FAA encourages operators to include M-PEDs in their
     carry-on baggage program and personal items policy to increase air travel accessibility
     for people with disabilities. Some M-PEDs are life-sustaining and cannot be turned off
     during flight, but generally, M-PEDs have safely been in use for decades as part of
     emergency medical services and commercial operations. An airline’s risk assessment and
     crewmember procedures must address proper stowage of larger M-PEDs and the need for
     certain M-PEDs to remain on during aircraft operations. Small M-PEDs must be secured
     during surface movement, takeoff, descent, approach, and landing; passengers should
     secure small M-PEDs on their person in an armband or garment pocket.

11.2 POCs. To comply with §§ 121.574(e)(1)(ii), 125.219(f)(1)(ii), and 135.91(f)(1)(ii), POC
     manufacturers must ensure their equipment does not interfere with electrical, navigation,
     or communication equipment on aircraft. When considering aircraft electromagnetic
     compatibility with POCs, the following are acceptable methods to allow unrestricted use
     of POCs:

      •    POC manufacturer-qualified radiated RF emissions testing;
      •    Electromagnetic compatibility testing for Class II medical devices intended for use in
           aviation by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA); or
      •    POC makes and models that either bear a label or are listed in § 121.574(e)(1)(v),
           125.219(f)(1)(v), or 135.91(f)(1)(v). Include specific POC makes and models in an
           airline’s carry-on baggage program and personal items policy.

11.3 Nondiscrimination Requirements. Air carriers should be aware of Department of
     Transportation (DOT) requirements in 14 CFR part 382 addressing the use of certain
     M-PEDs. More information on part 382 is at
     https://www.transportation.gov/airconsumer/passengers-disabilities.

  12 HOW TO OBTAIN REFERENCED DOCUMENTS.

12.1 RTCA Documents. You may order RTCA documents via telephone at (202) 833-9339,
     fax at (202) 833-9434, or online at http://www.rtca.org. You may also order documents
     by mail from:

           RTCA, Inc.
           1150 18th Street NW, Suite 910
           Washington, DC 20036


                                                9

10/27/17                                                                    AC 91.21-1D


12.2 PED ARC Recommendation Report. You can find the PED ARC Recommendation
     Report at
     http://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/rulemaking/committees/documents/index.cfm/co
     mmittee/browse/committeeID/337.

  13 AC FEEDBACK FORM. For your convenience, the AC Feedback Form is the last page
     of this AC. Note any deficiencies found, clarifications needed, or suggested
     improvements regarding the contents of this AC on the Feedback Form.


John Barbagallo
Deputy Executive Director, Flight Standards Service


                                             10

                              Advisory Circular Feedback Form

If you find an error in this AC, have recommendations for improving it, or have suggestions
for new items/subjects to be added, you may let us know by contacting the Flight Standards
Directives Management Officer at 9-AWA-AFS-140-Directives@faa.gov.


Subject: AC 91.21-1D, Use of Portable Electronic Devices Aboard Aircraft

Date: _____________________

Please check all appropriate line items:

     An error (procedural or typographical) has been noted in paragraph ____________
     on page _______.

     Recommend paragraph _____________ on page __________ be changed as follows:

     ______________________________________________________________________

     ______________________________________________________________________

     In a future change to this AC, please cover the following subject:
     (Briefly describe what you want added.)

     ______________________________________________________________________

     ______________________________________________________________________

     Other comments:

     ______________________________________________________________________

     ______________________________________________________________________

     I would like to discuss the above. Please contact me.


Submitted by:                                                Date: ______________________