                                                                                                  InFO
                                                                                                  Information for Operators

                                                                                                  InFO 23006
 U.S. Department                                                                                  DATE: 05/02/23
 of Transportation
 Federal Aviation                                                                                 Flight Standards Service
 Administration                                                                                   Washington, DC

http://www.faa.gov/other_visit/aviation_industry/airline_operators/airline_safety/info___________________
An InFO contains valuable information for operators that should help them meet certain administrative, regulatory, or
operational requirements, with relatively low urgency or impact on safety. The contents of this document do not have the force
and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide clarity to the
public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.

Subject: Special Airworthiness Information Bulletins (SAIB) AIR 21-19R1 Incorrect Breakaway
Pin Installations.

Purpose: This InFO serves to remind Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 133
rotorcraft operators, owners, pilots and maintenance personnel of a potential safety issue(s) regarding
breakaway pin installation. The potentially affected aircraft are (MDHI) Model 369D, 369E, 369F,
369FF, 500N, and 600N helicopters with installed Colorado Helicopters, Inc. Supplemental Type
Certificate (STC) SH5230NM Side Pull Hook Assembly.

Background: The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) became aware that the breakaway pin
installed on STC SH5230NM could be replaced with the wrong pin or a bolt prior to operations.

Discussion: The side pull hook link installation is certified for a maximum pull load of 1,900 pounds
and is safeguarded by the calibrated breakaway pin connecting the two pieces of the swivel. If the side
pull hook link installation is overloaded, the breakaway pin is designed to shear and allow the load line
to fall away without upsetting the helicopter. Installation of other than the approved breakaway pin
could result in helicopter damage, upset, and loss of control if the maximum pull load of 1,900 pounds
is exceeded.

Recommended Action: The FAA recommends owners, operators and pilots of the affected aircraft
listed in this InFO conduct a visual inspection of the breakaway pin per SAIB AIR 21-19R1 before
conducting any side pull operations. If the pin is

    •   not secured by the retaining ring, or
    •   not green on one end, or
    •   does not fill the hole through the swivel, or
    •   shows signs of damage,

it should be replaced with pin part number 91106-018 prior to the next side pull operation.

Contact: Questions or comments regarding this InFO should be directed to the Aircraft Maintenance
Division at (202) 267-1675, or via email at 9-AWA-AFS-300-Maintenance@faa.gov.


Distributed by: Flight Standards