---
handbook: afh
edition: FAA-H-8083-3C
chapter_number: 17
section_title: Taxi
faa_pages: 17-12
section_number: 9
subsection_number: 5
source_url: https://www.faa.gov/sites/faa.gov/files/regulations_policies/handbooks_manuals/aviation/airplane_handbook/00_afh_full.pdf
---

# Taxi

Taxi
LSAs may have a full-castoring or steerable nose-wheel, or a tailwheel if equipped with conventional gear. In order to taxi a full­
castoring nose-wheel equipped airplane, the use of differential brakes is required. This type of nose-wheel can require practice to
keep the airplane on the centerline while minimizing brake application or damage to the tires. If the taxi speed is too slow, application
of a brake can cause the aircraft to pivot to a stop, rather than adjust in direction. This results in excessive brake and tire wear. If the
speed is too fast, excessive brake wear is likely.
Transitioning into an LSA with conventional gear (tailwheel) should occur initially during no-wind conditions. Due to its light weight
the airplane, requires the development of the proper flight control responses before operations in any substantial wind.
Takeoff and climb performance of LSAs can be spirited as they typically have a high horsepower-to-weight ratio and accelerate
quickly. Due to design requirements for low stall speeds, LSAs typically have low rotation and climb speeds with impressive climb
rates. Like other airplanes, the pilot should be flying the published speeds as given in the airplane’s POH. Stick (yoke or stoke) forces
tend to be light, which may lead a transitioning pilot to initially over-control. The key is to relax, have reasonable patience, and input
only appropriate flight control pressures needed to get the required response. If a transitioning pilot is inducing excessive control
inputs, they should minimize flight control pressures, set attitudes based on outside references, and allow the airplane to settle.
During climbs, visibility over the nose may be difficult in some LSAs. As always, it is important to properly clear the airspace for
traffic and other hazards. Occasionally lowering the airplane’s nose to get a good look out toward the horizon is important for
managing flight safety. Shallow banked turns in both directions of 10° to 20° also allow for clearing. Because flight control pressures
tend to be light, it is easy to get in the habit of flying with a light-sport airplane out of trim. This is to be avoided. Trim off any flight
control pressures. This allows the pilot to focus as much time as possible looking outside.
