# SAFETY LOGIC SYSTEM ALERTS

a. ALERT- An actual situation involving two real
safety logic tracks (aircraft/aircraft, aircraft/vehicle,

or aircraft/other tangible object) that safety logic has
predicted will result in an imminent collision, based
upon the current set of Safety Logic parameters.
b. FALSE ALERT-
1. Alerts generated by one or more false
surface-radar targets that the system has interpreted
as real tracks and placed into safety logic.
2. Alerts in which the safety logic software did
not perform correctly, based upon the design
specifications and the current set of Safety Logic
parameters.
3. The alert is generated by surface radar targets
caused by moderate or greater precipitation.
c. NUISANCE ALERT- An alert in which one or
more of the following is true:
1. The alert is generated by a known situation
that is not considered an unsafe operation, such as
LAHSO or other approved operations.
2. The alert is generated by inaccurate secondary radar data received by the Safety Logic System.
3. One or more of the aircraft involved in the
alert is not intending to use a runway (for example,
helicopter, pipeline patrol, non-Mode C overflight,
etc.).
d. VALID NON-ALERT- A situation in which
the safety logic software correctly determines that an
alert is not required, based upon the design
specifications and the current set of Safety Logic
parameters.
e. INVALID NON-ALERT- A situation in which
the safety logic software did not issue an alert when
an alert was required, based upon the design
specifications.
SAIL BACK- A maneuver during high wind
conditions (usually with power off) where float plane
movement is controlled by water rudders/opening
and closing cabin doors.
SAME DIRECTION AIRCRAFT- Aircraft are
operating in the same direction when:
a. They are following the same track in the same
direction; or
b. Their tracks are parallel and the aircraft are
flying in the same direction; or
c. Their tracks intersect at an angle of less than 45
degrees.

PCG S-1

SAR-
(See SEARCH AND RESCUE.)

SAY AGAIN- Used to request a repeat of the last
transmission. Usually specifies transmission or
portion thereof not understood or received; e.g., “Say
again all after ABRAM VOR.”
SAY ALTITUDE- Used by ATC to ascertain an
aircraft’s specific altitude/flight level. When the
aircraft is climbing or descending, the pilot should
state the indicated altitude rounded to the nearest 100
feet.
SAY HEADING- Used by ATC to request an aircraft
heading. The pilot should state the actual heading of
the aircraft.
SCHEDULED TIME OF ARRIVAL (STA)- A STA
is the desired time that an aircraft should cross a
certain point (landing or metering fix). It takes other
traffic and airspace configuration into account. A
STA time shows the results of the TBFM scheduler
that has calculated an arrival time according to
parameters such as optimized spacing, aircraft
performance, and weather.
SDF-
(See SIMPLIFIED DIRECTIONAL FACILITY.)

SEA LANE- A designated portion of water outlined
by visual surface markers for and intended to be used
by aircraft designed to operate on water.
SEARCH AND RESCUE- A service which seeks
missing aircraft and assists those found to be in need
of assistance. It is a cooperative effort using the
facilities and services of available Federal, state and
local agencies. The U.S. Coast Guard is responsible
for coordination of search and rescue for the Maritime
Region, and the U.S. Air Force is responsible for
search and rescue for the Inland Region. Information
pertinent to search and rescue should be passed
through any air traffic facility or be transmitted
directly to the Rescue Coordination Center by
telephone.
(See FLIGHT SERVICE STATION.)
(See RESCUE COORDINATION CENTER.)
(Refer to AIM.)

SEARCH AND RESCUE FACILITY- A facility
responsible for maintaining and operating a search
and rescue (SAR) service to render aid to persons and
property in distress. It is any SAR unit, station, NET,
or other operational activity which can be usefully

PCG S-2


employed during an SAR Mission; e.g., a Civil Air
Patrol Wing, or a Coast Guard Station.
(See SEARCH AND RESCUE.)
