---
handbook: iph
edition: FAA-H-8083-16B
chapter_number: 6
section_title: ARINC 424
faa_pages: 6-4
section_number: 2
subsection_number: 1
source_url: https://www.faa.gov/sites/faa.gov/files/regulations_policies/handbooks_manuals/aviation/instrument_procedures_handbook/FAA-H-8083-16B.pdf
---

# ARINC 424

ARINC 424
ARINC 424 is the air transport industry’s recommended
standard for the preparation and transmission of data for
the assembly of airborne system navigation databases. The
data is intended for merging with the aircraft navigation
system software to provide a source of navigation
reference. Each subsequent version of ARINC 424
Specification provides additional capability for navigation
systems to utilize. Merging of ARINC 424 data with each
manufacturer’s system software is unique and ARINC 424
leg types provide vertical guidance and ground track for
a specific flight procedure. These leg types must provide
repeatable flight tracks for the procedure design. The
navigation database leg type is the path and terminator
concept.
ARINC 424 Specification describes 23 leg types by their path
and terminator. The path describes how the aircraft gets to
the terminator by flying direct (a heading, a track, a course,
etc.). The terminator is the event or condition that causes
the navigation computer system to switch to the next leg (a
fix, an altitude, an intercept, etc.). When a flight procedure
instructs the pilot to fly runway heading to 2000 feet then
direct to a fix, this is the path and terminator concept. The
path is the heading and the terminator is 2000 feet. The
next leg is then automatically sequenced. A series of leg
types are coded into a navigation database to make a flight
procedure. The navigation database allows an FMS or GPS
navigator to create a continuous display of navigational
data, thus enabling an aircraft to be flown along a specific
route. Vertical navigation can also be coded.
The data included in an airborne navigation database is
organized into ARINC 424 records. These records are strings
of characters that make up complex descriptions of each
navigation entity. ARINC records can be sorted into four
general groups:  fix records, simple route records, complex
route records, and miscellaneous records. Although it is not
important for pilots to have in-depth knowledge of all the
fields contained in the ARINC 424 records, pilots should be
aware of the types of records contained in the navigation
database and their general content.
