5. LANDING AND BRAKING TECHNIQUE. The flare, touchdown, and the braking
technique, are also critical factors in completing a successful approach and landing maneuver.
Landing and braking techniques are discussed below from a point at the beginning of the


Page 12

9/17/14                                                                                 AC 91-79A
                                                                                        Appendix 1
approach flare through a point at which the airplane decelerates to normal taxi speed or has been
brought to a full stop.

    a. The Flare. The flare reduces the approach rate of descent to a more acceptable rate for
touchdown. If the flare is extended while additional speed is bled off, additional runway will be
used. An extended flare may also result in an increase in pitch attitude which may lead to a tail
strike. A firm landing does not mean a hard landing, but rather a deliberate or positive
touchdown at the desired touchdown point. A landing executed solely for passenger comfort
considerations, which extends the touchdown point beyond the TDZ, is not impressive, desirable,
or consistent with safety or regulations. It is essential to fly the airplane onto the runway at the
target touchdown point. See Figure 1-5, Effects of an Extended Flare, as an example of the
results of an extended flare.

                    FIGURE 1-5. EFFECTS OF AN EXTENDED FLARE


    b. Touchdown. A proper approach and flare positions the airplane to touch down at the
target touchdown point. Once the main wheels have contacted the runway, the pilot must
maintain directional control and initiate the stopping process. The runway distance available to
stop is longest if the touchdown was on target. Once the airplane is on the ground, ground


                                                                                           Page 13

AC 91-79A                                                                                   9/17/14
Appendix 1
spoilers, wheel brakes, and reversers (depending on airplane equipage) are much more effective
in slowing the airplane than the aerodynamic drag produced in the flare maneuver.

       NOTE: General aviation airplane technique is to slowly apply backpressure
       to the yoke to assist braking and to avoid damage to the nose gear or
       propeller.

     c. Braking. A distinction should be made between the procedures for minimum landing
distance and an ordinary landing roll with considerable excess runway available. Minimum
landing distance will be obtained by creating a continuous peak deceleration of the airplane; that
is, extensive use of the brakes for maximum deceleration. On the other hand, an ordinary landing
roll with considerable excess runway may allow extensive use of aerodynamic drag to minimize
wear and tear on the tires and brakes. If aerodynamic drag is sufficient to cause deceleration, it
can be used in deference to the brakes in the early stages of the landing roll. For instance, brakes
and tires suffer from continuous hard use, but airplane aerodynamic drag is free and does not
wear out with use. The use of aerodynamic drag is applicable only for deceleration to 60 or
70 percent of the touchdown speed. At speeds less than 60 to 70 percent of the touchdown speed,
aerodynamic drag is so slight as to be of little use, and braking must be utilized to produce
continued deceleration. Since the objective during the landing roll is to decelerate, the
powerplant thrust should be the smallest possible positive value (or largest possible negative
value in the case of thrust reversers).

       NOTE: In addition to proper procedures, many other variables affect the
       landing performance. Any item that alters the landing speed or deceleration
       rate during the landing roll will affect the landing distance.

        (1) There are three primary forces available for deceleration during the rollout process:
wheel braking, aerodynamic drag, and reverse thrust/propeller reversing, if available. The
deployment of ground spoilers, if installed, immediately upon touchdown on the runway has the
effect of dumping the lift generated by the wings and placing the airplane’s weight on the
wheels, which enhances the effects of wheel braking after touchdown. Deployment of drag
devices are most effective at higher speeds and are not affected by runway surface conditions. In
all cases, the pilot must ensure the automatic deployment of the deceleration devices occurs. If
not, the pilot must immediately manually employ the devices to minimize the time lost to
achieve as close as possible the assessed landing distance.

        (2) Timely deployment of spoilers will increase drag by 50 to 60 percent, but more
importantly, deployment of the spoilers increases wheel loading by as much as 200 percent in the
landing flap configuration. This increases the tire-to-ground friction force making the maximum
tire braking forces available. Many airplanes with auto-spoilers installed require weight on
wheels to deploy the spoilers, which reinforces the requirement for a positive touchdown as a
soft touchdown can delay the automatic deployment. Spoiler deployment immediately after
touchdown provides the greatest benefit.

       (3) When minimum landing distances are considered, braking friction forces predominate
during the landing roll and, for the majority of airplane configurations, braking friction is the
main source of deceleration when the runway is dry.


Page 14

9/17/14                                                                                 AC 91-79A
                                                                                        Appendix 1
    d. Wet and Contaminated Runway Surface. When the runway is wet or slippery, reverse
thrust (if the airplane is equipped), may be the dominant deceleration force just after touchdown,
and throughout the deceleration if the runway has poor or worse braking conditions. As the
airplane slows down, the wheel brakes become the dominate deceleration force. When the
runway length is limited, for airplanes equipped with an antiskid system, maximum wheel
braking should be applied immediately after touchdown. For airplanes without an antiskid
system slow back pressure should be applied to the yoke such that it will not raise the nose of a
nose gear airplane for aerodynamic braking while maximum braking that will not cause skidding
is applied. In all situations, braking should be maintained until the airplane slows to a safe taxi
speed for the conditions.

    e. Autobrakes. If the airplane is equipped with autobrakes, manufacturers recommend the
use of the autobrakes for all landings on contaminated runways. Autobrakes are applied earlier in
the landing roll, and to the level selected by the pilot for the anticipated landing condition,
runway available, and provide the most efficient and timely use of braking action. However, the
pilot must ensure that if the autobrakes do not engage upon touchdown, then manual braking
must be applied.

    f. Antiskid. Application of brakes is different for airplanes equipped with a functioning
antiskid braking system than for airplanes without such a system.

        (1) For airplanes without an antiskid system, brakes should be applied progressively
throughout the deceleration process, and the pilot must recognize the point that wheel skid
occurs. Maximum braking effectiveness occurs just prior to the point where wheel skidding
occurs. However, should a skid occur, releasing brake pressure can stop skidding and then
maximum braking can be reestablished until the deceleration process is completed. Pilots should
be aware that a skid is most likely at higher speeds and at that point may not be perceptible.

        (2) For airplanes with antiskid system, to achieve the benefits of antiskid, the brakes must
be applied firmly throughout the deceleration process. When maximum braking is required, it is
accomplished by holding maximum brake application pressure and allowing the antiskid system
to operate. Letting up on the brakes (unless required to regain directional control) defeats the
purpose of the antiskid system. The pulsation caused by the modulation of the brake pressure by
the antiskid system indicates that the antiskid system is operating normally although the
pulsation may be disconcerting to the pilot.

    g. Touchdown Technique. A firm touchdown at the target touchdown point, followed by,
for those airplanes so equipped, the deployment of ground spoilers, the timely selection of thrust
reverse (if installed), and the application of max/progressively applied firm braking will result in
the shortest landing distance ground roll, particularly on wet or contaminated runway surfaces.

    h. Directional Control. The nosewheel should be lowered onto the runway immediately
after touchdown. Placing the nosewheel on the runway will assist in maintaining directional
control. It also decreases the wing angle of attack, thereby decreasing lift and placing more load
onto the tires, which increases tire-to-ground friction.


                                                                                            Page 15

AC 91-79A                                                                                    9/17/14
Appendix 1
    i. Thrust Reversers. In the event of an asymmetric deployment, the nosewheel on the
ground will aid in directional control. If the thrust reversers deploy asymmetrically, or if the
airplane begins to drift due to a crosswind, close the thrust reversers and reestablish directional
control. Once the airplane’s track down the runway is reestablished, redeploy the thrust
reversers. Use airplane steering in accordance with the AFM procedures.