19.6.6 Hail. Hail is precipitation in the form of balls or other irregular lumps of ice produced
       by thunderstorms. Thunderstorms that are characterized by strong updrafts, large
       supercooled liquid water contents, large cloud-drop sizes, and great vertical height are
       favorable to hail formation.

       An individual unit of hail is called a hailstone. Hailstones can range in size from a pea
       (0.25 inch diameter) to larger than a softball (4.5 inch diameter). Hailstones that are
       3/4 inch in diameter and larger can cause significant damage to aircraft and make
       it difficult to control. A hailstone was collected at Vivian, South Dakota,
       on July 23, 2010, that measured 8 inches in diameter, 18.62 inches in circumference, and
       weighed 1.93 pounds (see Figure 19-10).

                    Figure 19-10. Vivian, South Dakota Record Hailstone


       Hail is most frequently found in the interior of continents within the mid-latitudes and
       generally confined to higher elevations within the tropics. In the United States, hail
       is most common across the Great Plains region east of the Rocky Mountains. Hail is more
       common aloft and at higher elevations because the stones begin to melt when they fall
       below the freezing level, and the smaller stones may melt into raindrops before they
       reach the surface.


                                               19-9

8/23/16                                                                                   AC 00-6B


       When viewed from the air, it is evident that hail falls in paths known as hail swaths. They
       can range in size from a few acres to an area 10 miles wide and 100 miles long. Piles
       of hail in hail swaths have been deep enough to require a snow plow to remove them, and
       occasionally hail drifts have been reported.